---
---

# Discussion

**Date:** 4/12/2022

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:03.120):**  out.  hey felicity.

**Felicity Crawford (00:00:40.560):**  How are you.

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:42.060):**  i'm doing pretty good.  I don't know if you can hear hear this little chipmunk.

**Felicity Crawford (00:00:50.640):**  No, no, not yet.

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:53.820):**  he's eating but.

**Felicity Crawford (00:00:57.000):**  sweetie pie is so sweet he's gotten lots of Nice before so.

**Melisa Osborne (00:01:03.480):**  He has he's grown so much in the last week.  it's amazing it really is.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:13.980):**  enjoy Melissa.  Good.  Lots of cuddles Nice is he doing all right.

**Melisa Osborne (00:01:24.990):**  He is he's doing he's really doing good now, but it was last week was really hard on him.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:33.930):**  I couldn't imagine.

**Melisa Osborne (00:01:35.640):**  So he kind of had a meltdown on Saturday that was you know it was about dinner, but it wasn't about dinner right.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:47.130):**  It was a boy it's not the person taking up space.

**Melisa Osborne (00:01:51.780):**  Exactly, and he kind of like you know, he was just like I don't want to be told what to do was kind of what he said.  In the end.  So I think he felt like he lost a lot of.  Autonomy right.

**Felicity Crawford (00:02:13.020):**  You do come around yet.

**Melisa Osborne (00:02:26.010):**  Their background noise here splash can have you okay.

**Adam Labadorf (00:04:09.810):**  yeah.  I might be.  Your car there is.  already exceeded.  The.  Only.  thing i'm not sure my face the same way with a yes.  Parents and the Channel I pay my tuition.  Just.  straight up.  With a.  Really full, I wonder if they consider moments because that's.  pretty much true and it's.  I think yeah.  yeah.  yeah well the.  finger is about how even on a warning like hey guess what this is about like for this, why not oh.  yeah.  ain't.  No problem but.  yeah.  We really like it, I get it up here.  I mean oh you.  Are.  Out there I.  Actually finished it so.  don't be a shot.  yeah.  I don't i'm going to try to get another.  usual.  yeah.  yeah yeah.  yeah.  Like everybody's like today, I was late be cheap, so we only.  Does it back to being like crazy packed we have yeah so it's normal back to normal.  Some parts of normal are less enjoyable the others I guess is the writer on right let's be going on lots of announcements lots of things so sorry I just need to go over a bunch of stuff I sent out all these different.  words that I even sent out.  Okay So the first thing that's really important is the case that he is do a day earlier sorry about this, but.  Theresa has some hasn't traveled I didn't know about and so she's the one who's giving all the feedback on those so it's Sunday.  April 17 1159 and she is like completely unavailable starting on the 19th and so she wants to be able to give you the back on the 18th so unless like really extreme things happen, no late assignments, will be accepted okay 73.  I somehow managed to think ahead and there's already a dropbox link for case study three so it's there ready for you let's see what else um.  Any questions on that.  No okay.  What else.  Speaking of which okay joined us.

**Melisa Osborne (00:08:06.870):**  That that's that's Easter Sunday.  Like.  I yeah I don't.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:16.140):**  Know man.

**Melisa Osborne (00:08:18.300):**  um but maybe I can help out.  Maybe we can regroup and talk about it tomorrow.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:26.490):**  Alright, maybe we'll maybe i'll remove that announcement full talk right.

**Melisa Osborne (00:08:29.730):**  yeah okay.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:30.900):**  So many, many.  Exactly how this happened, but.  The background is we had used to have a meeting every week.  And so we were all really integrated and we all kind of knew what was happening, and then we kind of stopped having meetings for maybe two weeks and everything's falling apart so.  we're having meeting tomorrow against everything, maybe will will be more unified, there are a lot of moving parts in this class I am realizing now so many moving parts that need that for all right well Okay, so now some more information about that as it comes available so.  um.  let's see what else.

**Melisa Osborne (00:09:14.250):**  Sorry.

**Adam Labadorf (00:09:18.810):**  Final project is indeed.  Okay, so final project let's see if I got this right.  Today, and i'll talk about final projects, first, but before we talk about on projects that is dedication sticking with that.  So today's like the whole lecture I mean this is just the project discussion is dedicated to Nicole cardoza she's a social entrepreneur author speaker investor illusionist magician actually.  And she had this great Ted talk about the power of paying attention which I suggest you take a take a look at she's very much into wellness and like mindfulness and she created an Anti racism daily newsletter and blog I looked at this none of the articles have i'm.  Not on my radar.  yeah.

**no speaker (00:10:26.520):** I.

**Adam Labadorf (00:10:30.540):**  Was I gonna say I was going to show her web page, so this is her personal webpage and she's doing all sorts of cool things she's got a lot of.  Racial and health inequities in society and offers tangible resources for the wellness gap so wellness very much for your thing she recently recently wrote a children's book mindful moves people.  Apparently it's.  Possibly not on pre order anymore.  And so, he has this yoga and mindfulness apple elemental anti racism so really at the intersection on how these things work together, so this is the anti racism daily Melissa did you subscribe to this.

**Melisa Osborne (00:11:15.660):**  I do subscribe to this yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:11:17.790):**  Does it come in every day.

**Melisa Osborne (00:11:19.260):**  It does come in every day.

**Adam Labadorf (00:11:21.690):**  Because I was looking at these articles and none of them have dates on them, they just tell you how long it takes to read them.

**Melisa Osborne (00:11:31.110):**  it's really hard to go back and find things.

**Adam Labadorf (00:11:37.560):**  But lots of great stuff on there.  and very relevant to this part spell so like racial history of IQ testing many of the things we talked about in this class they have blogs blogs on.  And so magic.  So.  This this page is kind of cool.  And mark.  Where are we looking at here so final projects for the final project is.  is assigned today.  and your final project is meant to be kind of like a a bigger synthesis like a case study for instead of doing a single article there'll be fine identifying a selection of primary sources and doing essentially the same thing, but on a larger scale.  And the project should be centered around a central topic so you can take any one of the topics that will be our course roadmap bias.  weathering or any other topic you deem appropriate for this for the topic, and you will find is that you can pick one of your own course if you have any interest.  select three to five articles or other sources that will be podcasts that would be.  News articles publications and you'll integrate them together so that into a sentence right, so this emphasis is the same thing as a case study but it's just bigger.  And the format of your project.  is flexible and we'll talk a little bit about that later.  And the this is this is part of that the intent of this project is to allow you the space sort of integrate your own you know your own experiences and your own perspectives and context into one of the topics of the course however it may contact your life.  And Ideally, we would like to create these these projects are created in such a way that they can be shared broadly I meant to bring up some examples from last time.  But didn't apply.  But let's let's go on a little bit so.  So what does this look like this.  So you all, this is one of the today's slides you know what does it look like what do I have to do to get an A.  we're asking you to show your knowledge so we've covered a lot of topics in this class and.  there's many, many things that we've covered, so this is an opportunity for you to demonstrate your knowledge of one of the topics that we covered and we'd like to encourage creativity and risk taking, like this is, we had a skit last year, and it was awesome like wonderful.  And we're going to have some peer feedback only for like critiques and helpful ways that will be at the end of the Semester.  The project does not have a standard checkbox rubric so we can't tell you precisely the things that you need to do to get an A.  They won't be necessarily like a recipe style where all your projects will look similar but ideally they look very different from one another, or one, ideally, but they certainly can because you are all individuals, and you have all different creative creative bent some things.  And the the overarching one of the overarching goals of this whole class is to.  encourage you to engage more broadly than just with us and with each other.  We would like you know, especially we have scientists, you know, to bring this knowledge of history and the concepts that we've discovered discussed.  to bear in a broader integrated into your life and give back out share out, and so the these projects, do we would like you to think about you know if you're not required to share things publicly.  But if you just keep it in mind that if I was to do something and I want to communicate something to someone who is that someone what is that and what word, would you like to convince convey to them are convinced the most right, so this isn't just for great so there's more or the future.  And you have a you do have a lot of freedom in what you'd like what you can do so, you know what is the story you're telling reduce emphasis think of it in terms of the story, and that may or may not be connected to your personal experiences of Q.  Is the story, because the story have data is it related to science is it related to health, it could be any one of these things.  and think about who you're targeting so who might you want to communicate this to, and is it a group of people that you might want to convince at something.  And once you've identified your audience, what would you like them to take from your project, last year we had so many great projects last year.  One of them, one of the students interviewed I think a bunch of her family members or friends and family members and made a podcast like that interview with questions that they asked.  And if you think there are some misconceptions that your audience may have how might you disabuse them those misconceptions.  And then, finally, how do you make sure your message is clear like thinking about your audience, how would they receive.  What format, what sort of media.  Do you think they would receive a best if you're targeting your peers along discursive essay might not be the right format right.  I think, someone did a children's book last year.  Remember.

**Melisa Osborne (00:17:46.020):**  When.  We had a children's book with like five scientists who often get overlooked, we had some infographics we had like a Meta data analysis of 100 articles considered the top of ecology someone wrote a program for doing word analysis.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:08.580):**  yeah they did algorithmic bias in a purpose of text.

**Melisa Osborne (00:18:11.640):**  And, and then we have like we had people do papers to.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:16.860):**  You some people just did the traditional report so let's talk about that.  So the option one, so you can just do a traditional research favorite features and that will be just like the synthesis but a little bit bigger, we have some some instruction on how to write that.  But what we.  Think of and seems to be more fun for many is to this sort of non traditional sentences of learning you're doing the same thing for both of these you're identifying three to five articles on a particular topic and synthesizing them, but the format may be different.  And so, this, we have a document that has all this detailed in it, I just posted that on perusal.  But you could create a book.  There are these things, called Google tours which are sort of like interactive web experiences, I never heard of it, but do that.  can make an infographic so just a static image that has a bunch of information on it, you could think about curating a collection a digital collection of some sort and annotating and contextualize what works.  You can make a podcast.  or a video or do you know sock puppets anything.  I think we really wanted so Theresa really wanted to have sock puppet skip last year, but knowing knowing did one So if you feel inspired to.  Create it would like it might be believable you can make a website as well, so all of these so this, these are just different formats right, the content is sort of the same intent is the same, but all of these sort of formats are.  You know, we think of them as being more accessible, or more engaging to many different types of audiences so use your creativity, you can think of whatever you can think of, we can consider.  So we're sharing the project details today so take some time to think about what your topic is, and you can form groups of you can work independently or have a group two or three.  or whatever you choose on the same topic or you'll all be working on the same topic and I didn't update this this one, there are data all through these slides was a Oh, my goodness.  and change so many days.  Is that that is our it's totally right.

**no speaker (00:20:41.610):** But.

**Adam Labadorf (00:20:47.220):**  And so you have about a week to come up with us, there is a formal project proposal from so we would like you to just describe briefly what you have in mind for your project and then write it up on a on a project proposal sheet and we put that on there.  And we were i'm not really sure how many groups or you're looking to have so last time we needed a full to like a whole week.  for everyone to present just because of the number of groups, but we might be able to fit into the single period, depending on how many how you guys organize yourselves because.  During this week for 28 or 531 of these two days to Thursday Tuesday you'll be presenting like a 10 minute presentation of your project.  And the final, but the final project doesn't do until the end of exams and so like if the final doesn't have to be finished and polished by this time, when you present but you should have most of the content on.  And, depending on how many groups, you have we may be able to fit all 10 minute presentations into one class period, which is why we may have made if if we can fit it all into one class period will have them apply three, I think.  And there'll be a form that will be able to get feedback we did this last semester as well it's not part of your grade just be back.  And in addition you'll submit a one page individual reflection so each person just reflect on the process of making this project, and I think we have some guidance for you on that as well.  As for the assessment or took the data out of this one as well, but i'm.  Just in terms of like roughly.  How much of your grade, you can expect to be associated with this, the proposal is 5% so just pass it in.  The presentation that we have will be 10% of the grade final projects like the end of the document itself or whatever, that is a 10% and then your individual selection is another 5% and this product is 30% of your overall grade.  So.  yeah.  In the proposal sheet that we share with you, we have this past, so we would.  Our sort of one of our dreams for this class was to build a section of the website that had projects that the students had done over the semesters with their consent, of course, and with names redacted if desired.  And we haven't done this yet, but we would like to and so we'd like to encourage you to think about that so upfront that's why we have this on the forum is the text on the form, and so we.  Either beforehand, if you know definitely that you're willing to take the product or whatever you make, and make it available.  just put your name there we had some questions last time where they're like they weren't sure if they wanted their they wanted to say yes beforehand so you're not committing to anything by putting your line this line, but.  If you're open to it, can you to having your project posted online, but it would like to decide later that's fine too.  And then also if you want to have your neighborhood or anonymity purposes.  you'll see this in the form but.  Again, we would really like to make you know, this is something of a sizzle like mini activism like to think of it as many activism you're not required to be after this course, but we would like to encourage you to be.  I mean.  These are just some resources, you are welcome to look anywhere and everywhere, for the sources for your topic.  Many more than this Google isn't even listed your guests, because we've not been mentioned.  An old newspapers like you could do at historical for view of some topic some events in the past.  So.  that's the final project.  Any questions or concerns.  If we're doing like a topic that we obviously talked about before we can use all the resources.  That we have every.  single project that we like.  To think we have the ideas that were asked me to identify resources that we didn't cover directly in the past, so not the readings so other things that's a great question.  yeah do your own exploration do your research do I or.  put them on perusal.  I put it in an announcement.  So here this, this is the actual actually let me open this up.  yep.  So this is, I mean it has everything that I just talked about but it's written out.  And these are the different types types of things, and then the proposal form looks like.  He just writing a 500 word description so basically really helped me write a sentence and wherever we.  Go same idea, but you just have more flexibility in the partner.  will be kind of just.  The race, this is a your mind increasing share the ideas from the journals and It evolves into.  I was just wondering.  yeah well, I mean if you're placing an example.  let's take so today we're going to part of the discussion will be the egfr the renal function thing like if you could imagine that concept being in a children's book.  Like What would it look like i'm not asking you i'm saying that thinking about it that way, because you'd have you presented in a very particular way right like you'd have to simplify things.  But, of course, you need to collect information from multiple sources to do that.  yeah so the right the children's book from last time was.  Angola said it was five scientists of color that have been overlooked.  In the past, and so I think they just have like a page on each each one with I presumably simplified language that I remember that yeah idea.  Any more questions.  Really submit the form or.  No, I mean you did so much.  you're right there are a lot of moving parts here well i'm.

**no speaker (00:28:18.420):** Sorry.

**Adam Labadorf (00:28:20.310):**  I don't know.  something about.  excuse.  Right.  Now, thank you for asking.  Oh, there was always one other thing I didn't do.  Okay, so okay.  Any last questions about project.  Okay i'm going to close them.  yeah.

**no speaker (00:29:24.810):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:29:37.530):**  let's see so what am I going to be first.  The this discussion actually so let's do.  i'm kind of i'm kind of all over the place today but.  let's talk about renal function.  So this, this is not, I mean this is about egfr well we'll get to it so there's actually another dedication, because it was another lecture.  see this occasion.  that's why.  This.  Is no.

**no speaker (00:30:51.570):** search engine Google issue.

**Adam Labadorf (00:30:56.970):**  Why.  I think this was so Dr come on Friday was she was one of the Google doodles last fall, I remember.  Is the search engine Google is showing this doodle in some countries on November 8 2021 to celebrate Indian cell biologist.  Dr kammen ran a deal on her hundred and 40th birthday Rana do is best known for her groundbreaking cancer research and devotion to creating a more equitable society through science and education.  camel Samara, better known as common value was born on this day in 1917 in.  India her father's encouragement to pursue your medical education in spite grandiose to excel academically but she found her calling in biology instead.  In 1949 see received the a doctorate in psychology the study of cells, while working as a researcher in the Indian cancer research Center ICRC.  After a fellowship at Johns Hopkins University in baltimore Maryland esca see return to Mumbai then Bombay and the ICRC will see established the country's first tissue culture laboratory.  As their director of the ICRC and the pioneer in animal modeling of cancer development.  Randy was among the faster researchers in India to propose the link between breast cancer and heredity and to identify the links among cancers and set in viruses.  containing these trailblazing work reduce studied mycobacterium library, the bacteria that causes leprosy and aided in developing yeah vaccine.  In 1973 Dr Renata do and 11 colleagues founder the Indian woman scientist association iwa say to support women in scientific fields.  Around or do fervently encourage the students and the Indians collars abroad to return to India and put the knowledge to work for their communities.  after retiring in 1989 Dr Randy worked in rural communities in Maharashtra training woman as healthcare workers and providing health and nutrition education.  The idea is he now has 11 chapters in India and provide scholarships and child care options for women in science doctor and his dedication to health, justice and education remains influential to have students who work as scientists today.  yeah so major contributions to.  To several fields and, if I remember correctly, her mentor at Johns Hopkins was the guy who, I think, was behind.  He also won.  Think.  So.  Complex history their.  search engine Google no okay all right.  Okay, so this is actually just a little bit of a lecture.  I want to mention the reading from last week was about nephrology, and so did some solar some of the like it was mentioned in the reading from this week so.  The one of the papers that was originally published looking at this difference in renal function between African Americans compared with white was this paper, I think it was published in 2001 2003 somewhere around there.  And this was where they actually attempted to estimate an equation that would you know, for that would actually be used news in clinic for indicating renal function.  And so, just to go over some details if you're not familiar with gsr so vfr glare ruler filtration rate describes the flow rate of filtered fluid through the kidney so the more rates, you have the more filtration you can these are able to to to.  The more your kids are processing and removing toxins from your blood and so a low flow rate and it's a gsr is a physiological phenomenon like it's actually something that your body's doing.  And a low flow rate indicates poor kidney function.  And the.  The earlier methods of measuring Jabbar is by injecting a labeled isotope into your blood and then measuring how long it takes for that isotope to be processed be filtered.  and  Leaving from the urine.  And this method is expensive and time intensive like people have to leave, and they have to come back it's it's complicated and, and so the this.  They were looking for a more effective and easily measurable measurement of Jafar.  So the, the idea was that they can use this creative name the concentration of creating in the blood as an indicator kidney health because it is easily measured byproduct of muscle metabolism, that is extremely unchanged by the kids right so.  The idea is that we have possible create me in our in our bodies and then.  converted to be happening in a particular process, so the amount of creativity that you have in your blood is.  An indication to me it's our indication of us to estimate Jia Jia bar so the gsr the actual rate is clinically important does it measure kidney function.  However, and this is right from Wikipedia in cases of severe kidney dysfunction However, this creating the clearance rate will overestimate your bar because hyper secretion of creating mean by the proximal to appeals will account for a large fraction of the total grab need clear.  So, in other words, when your functions aren't when your kidneys aren't working very well.  The measurement implies that you have a higher filtration right, then you do.  It so far is over, estimated.  This is exactly the problem that this metric is trying to estimate and such exactly what it's trying to estimate.  Is kidney function if you're getting function gets his poor, then this becomes a worse indicator of June of 25.  So this is actually the equation, but they came up with, so they measured so as K, this is another study after the American Academy, but as it stands for the different study where they estimated a bunch of.  crap me new metric gretton serum levels.  And so, this is their formula, and this is the measured gsr by this complicated method right, and so, ideally, if the test was perfect all the dots would be along this line.  But of course there's a spread has always been to be a range and below this diagonal are the are the the individuals for whom that were the measure of our was much higher than the estimated tfr.  Right, so that means that their kidney function.  was being underestimated by their formula.  And, but they've created this little regression when they come up with this model, and so this is the the actual, this is the numbers, I could get plugged in they changed it for women.  Because that apparently the rate is different there.  So anyway that that's, I just wanted to.  cover a little bit about how these numbers are calculated like there's an actual formula somewhere that's estimated from some data and there's some range and and for some individuals in the most extreme case like the formula estimates that they have like less than half.  The kidney function that, as measured by the gold standard.  So while you know for many individuals and might be someone I through there's also a bunch that are you know the gsr is there any function as far worse than predicted by the actual formula, but there's always going to be Eric, and so the question is, are there any biases to this air.  And so i'm just going to.  yeah okay so let's think about what we're doing these this is from the article itself as a trial documented that serum three happening level was an imprecise measure of renal function.  Because it consistently overestimate egfr this is in the actual publication they mentioned this.  This wasn't a population of patients who received careful urine collection instructions.  As participants in a clinical trial, it was anticipated that the accuracy of 24 hour urine blockage would be less the actors who will be less than a clinical practice setting right, so this this was consistently overestimated.  In the ideal collection circumstances, and so in a regular clinical setting like would be even worse.  So let's think about what we're doing there so we're trying to measure renal function like the actual for trying to measure.  Which is estimated by the commercial or filtration rate, which is estimated by this filtration this isotope filtration.  Which is estimated by an equation that includes kraton levels, which is estimated in a population of about 3000 people all of it just they mentioned in this that in this paper all of the individuals that they surveyed were sick like they had work can be found on getting function.  Across 20 years of age and different sexes BMI central.  So the.  The point that i'm trying to make, but I wanted to make about this is that.  There are a lot of sources of potential error.  Whenever you're talking about these sort of studies, but they you know they published this paper and out in like business convenient formula that they have in this plot that does this.  But really what you're doing right, and so you like you want to measure renal function.  But then you're measuring something that estimates that and then you're measuring something that estimates that and then measuring something that is my stuff.  Right so you're introducing more and more error into your measurements whenever you do this and I don't mean to like call this these authors out like this is intrinsic to building this kind of model.  um.  But I do have to call them out for the last two paragraphs, so in this study we only examine African Americans with hypertensive never sclerosis, so this is like poor kidney function.  Who were screened for our study, and so the African Americans who with hypertensive members fluorosis who were screened for our study.  And does cannot we as, as the authors cannot comment on the possibility of our results to a broader or different group of Americans great like that's what they should say.  The next sentence we conclude that there are important differences in real function measurements and African Americans compared with non academic like wait what.  Literally the next happens, I think the appeal.  So I mean.  Why might be sentences a bed like right next to each other in the paper.  masking out of the room, but on a.  minute.  After all, these visions, because i've got the Barbecue or my get your own visions, but they just tell our integration stuff have.  remained deeper inside it like like honestly I think it's hard to to end the paper saying, well, we can't comment on the accountability of our results you know you're not going to end up using that fake.  yeah well again.  Right exactly the right like.  yeah i'm.  ISIS suspect that.  Well, first off is not one author on this paper.  In second this paper had to undergo review.  And so, this this feels like split personality right it's almost like you have two different people saying things about study which may actually have been true.  And I think the like the the main takeaway here is that there, if anything, maybe this is like evidence of the strength of our pre.  conceived notions about things right it's like yeah we we do correctly point out that this would be sampling bias and there's all these limitations, but like I just can't resist saying that we therefore conclude this big broad sweeping generalization.  Because, who knows, like, I think this paper went on to set the standard for the test.  And if they didn't say that, then what basis is there for providing this test to people.  They have to sound confident.  That their results generalized otherwise you know.  The reality is, with the difficulty of the gold standard test this, at least, would allow people to be measured.  it's much easier to measure and that other one.  So the question is.  what's the poop would be hard.  And who can benefit I think there's like another sort of intrinsic cost benefit calculation that's going on.  And thinking about this.  This is what I selected this.  Any thoughts or questions about this before we've gone to the other discussion, we may end up early today.  The details are always important.  Okay.  Say other the readings kind of gotten mixed up between last week and, last week, so this this past week you read.  The medical apartheid infection in equity and how racism creeps into medicine.  Or at least those are the ones that were lined up with the reading.  So I have one question.  One discussion question for this.  So my plan was just to break up into groups.  discuss these readings answer these questions and then we'll reconvene.  Next week.

**no speaker (00:47:36.270):** picture. Now, but.

**Adam Labadorf (00:47:58.770):**  yeah.  I should have worked last night.  I didn't didn't have enough time to prepare for this lecture today last night.  Not quite done well now i'm done.

**no speaker (00:48:26.100):** No.

**Adam Labadorf (00:48:37.560):**  No super.  it's good, but I think I relaxed a little too soon.  that's the problem.  I have forgotten about all the final project stuff that needed to happen today if I didn't have as much time, especially like.

**Melisa Osborne (00:49:01.290):**  I see ya know.  kind of it kind of creeps up on you does.

**Adam Labadorf (00:49:06.840):**  This time of year at this time it did.  There are a lot of different things, and a lot of different places for this class.

**Melisa Osborne (00:49:15.690):**  yeah I don't know, maybe that's something we should work on making a little less.

**Adam Labadorf (00:49:22.470):**  Well, I mean it's all in your head doesn't make sense to you and so unless you plan on giving birth again that's fine.

**Melisa Osborne (00:49:33.660):**  Now, no i'm good.

**Felicity Crawford (00:49:36.900):**  So Adam, are we going to temple to go swimming and on Thursday.

**Adam Labadorf (00:49:42.480):**  Oh yeah that was another monster, not what I meant to make.  Yes, I think.

**Felicity Crawford (00:49:48.330):**  Just Thursday.

**Adam Labadorf (00:49:51.690):**  I mean we could do Thursday and Tuesday like you're out of town both days right.

**Felicity Crawford (00:49:55.830):**  Well i'm out of town on Thursday Intel to say, but quite hectic I know that I make it over.  To give.  Everyone a risk.

**Adam Labadorf (00:50:12.030):**  I have no problem with saying classes over zoom just for these logistical reasons, Melissa do you have.

**Melisa Osborne (00:50:20.130):**  I think that's fine.

**Adam Labadorf (00:50:22.770):**  So.

**Melisa Osborne (00:50:26.490):**  I guess my my question was are they going to actually have time to talk about the final projects at some point.

**Felicity Crawford (00:50:33.090):**  yeah I will read from we work on and make room on.  to sleep because Adam mentioned that will do that right.

**Adam Labadorf (00:50:43.290):**  Well, I originally had that in there, but I took it out, because I didn't want to speak for you listening.

**Felicity Crawford (00:50:49.080):**  yeah I can.  I love I love you manage it, so we can make sure that maybe we start with that.

**Adam Labadorf (00:50:56.640):**  Sure, I mean we I think it's also reasonable to let them run around like they have lots of tools to communicate with one another.  what's up what's up to you, do you want it, but I.

**Melisa Osborne (00:51:12.960):**  don't really.  I think it could go either way.  I don't think it's a huge deal so.

**Felicity Crawford (00:51:20.220):**  Okay well.  At least mentioned it and see people leave.

**Adam Labadorf (00:51:28.200):**  or.

**Felicity Crawford (00:51:30.210):**  I could make an adjustment.

**Adam Labadorf (00:51:38.160):**  sounds good i'll make sure that everyone knows that.  lecture will be on obviously i'm on Thursday.  But not.  Or did you.

**Felicity Crawford (00:51:48.150):**  already said, we started to see if it works for you, because I don't know the thread is going to be there, what it would mean is that you will be there and I will be and you want to do.  So.

**Melisa Osborne (00:52:03.180):**  We should just have it be both are on zoom.

**Felicity Crawford (00:52:05.880):**  yeah okay.  Okay, so I will um and then i'll make little room to find out whether that's lead time within the class to talk about yes.

**Adam Labadorf (00:52:25.140):**  yeah.

**Felicity Crawford (00:52:26.100):**  And so, just to clarify once I put the.  Put the whole point on the grid.  Does that mean it makes it easy for you to it makes it easy for it to show up in the.  In our class website.

**no speaker (00:52:45.720):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:52:48.300):**  So you can do that right now.  You uploaded these two right.

**Felicity Crawford (00:52:55.470):**  yeah.  But I just might make a few.  Adjustments given what we just discussed yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:53:01.020):**  Sure, I mean I if we can, if we can translate these into our actual we'll see what happens is.  That the way that we do this is, I just share i'm.  not sure.  Published now if I go here to publish, which means that this document within drive itself like you can go in here just edit this.  And then.  Whatever you change will be reflected on website.

**no speaker (00:53:38.070):** Okay.

**Adam Labadorf (00:53:40.470):**  yeah.

**no speaker (00:53:45.930):** It.

**Adam Labadorf (00:53:51.330):**  So yeah that's that's how all these other ones work so.  Just one less thing to keep track of.

**Felicity Crawford (00:53:57.990):**  Right right.

**no speaker (00:54:03.930):** yeah good.

**Adam Labadorf (00:54:11.520):**  Night good night.

**no speaker (00:54:24.810):** Be. On. Saturday you're like.

**Adam Labadorf (00:54:36.510):**  I need it oh.

**Melisa Osborne (00:54:38.820):**  yeah I updated the table of contents yesterday a little bit.

**Adam Labadorf (00:54:43.710):**  On the website.

**Melisa Osborne (00:54:45.180):**  No i'm the new in this notebook.

**Adam Labadorf (00:54:49.140):**  table contents.

**no speaker (00:54:50.430):** yeah so.

**Melisa Osborne (00:54:53.370):**  You can you can take the girl out of lab.  I didn't know if you have like a.  I have to go back into the slides and see if you have like a PDF link or something to those compass questions.  That I could add in here.

**Adam Labadorf (00:55:16.620):**  The actual link to it.  yeah no it isn't one of the slides.

**Melisa Osborne (00:55:21.600):**  yeah I figured it was.  So I added in because I actually thought that was really interesting be able to being able to see their original document.

**Adam Labadorf (00:55:32.460):**  yeah i'm really glad the link right.  Yes.  See how the sausage is made.

**no speaker (00:55:39.510):** So, to speak yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (00:55:42.780):**  And felicity I checked on whether your readings are in perusal and they are.  I don't know if we have to write.

**Felicity Crawford (00:55:54.510):**  Anything else.

**Melisa Osborne (00:55:56.670):**  But yes, that was not the annotation isn't.

**no speaker (00:56:01.890):** Okay, great.

**Melisa Osborne (00:56:03.510):**  I think is a good call.  No one's ever gonna resent having something being taken off their plate.

**Adam Labadorf (00:56:23.910):**  watched a Ted talk and a couple days ago, over the weekend, where they actually did.  So the the person talking was.  Describing an employee who was really struggling yeah.  yeah and the employees manager like assumed that she was struggling or she was doing too much.  So he didn't ask you didn't think to ask her he just thought he stressed out because just too much work, because we would keep taking things off her plate and she's like Why would you do that, like I need to be more you give me more challenges.  So it turned out that it was.  Reducing the things that she has to do was undermining because it was like what you can't trust me.  To get things done, like i'm feeling under under engaged like that was the problem so asking.  me what's that yeah.  figure out what it is that she will need it.

**Melisa Osborne (00:57:23.910):**  Oh that's interesting.  I was thinking of it in more of a general term was a.

**no speaker (00:57:28.800):** Group.

**Melisa Osborne (00:57:31.770):**  But I guess I could apply, but like on an individual level know like.  yeah you have to ask the person well.  i've actually had that happen to me.  Like people take stuff away from you, without giving you say.

**Adam Labadorf (00:57:57.660):**  into the super.

**no speaker (00:58:01.320):** Did you.

**Melisa Osborne (00:58:02.940):**  Like you take away their autonomy.

**no speaker (00:58:05.220):** Right.

**Adam Labadorf (00:58:06.720):**  yeah it can be interpreted as like a lack of confidence and their abilities right clearly you can take take us handle as much so we're going to give you less.  yeah.  seems like the question I.  pulled out of the air last minute is when our discussion so that's good.

**Melisa Osborne (00:58:38.760):**  I think it's very relevant.  Giving current events.

**no speaker (00:58:53.100):** This is. sort of. Like.

**Adam Labadorf (00:59:30.180):**  yeah.  yeah.  yeah.  that's yeah.

**no speaker (00:59:47.790):** pace.

**Adam Labadorf (00:59:53.910):**  yourself.  Against the machine, and the reason, any issues.  Please bring your artist it's like where does.  He.  live in the south.  And gina island, if you have.  Issues to on say that even wait.  For it yeah reach others yeah.  A.  lot of things.  In.

**no speaker (01:00:35.040):** order. For.

**Adam Labadorf (01:00:40.260):**  let's gather..  Well, I have you guys attention at the moment i'm class on Thursday will be over zoom publicity is giving lecture but she's out of state and so no in class on Thursday..  There might be, there will also be known in class on Tuesday, I think, but definitely present will will communicate this out elsewhere but..  OK another announcement, I meant to make beginning that I forgot so..  To the discussion so what issues questions are posed by this really..  Is was much like a question is asking how these part of it is like, how do we balance..  Public Health Emily you know the into some binary communities that have a whole it was like how it is medicine interact with race and like, how is it negatively impacting and very, very broadly defined striking examples..  yeah that's for sure..  Because of complicating factor is no yes these marginalized communities are very severely affected by these types of health conditions but there's one point when they point out that not many people of color work in service..  Jobs, where they have exposure to you know people outside of those communities, so the potential influence of any of these you know..  Infectious Diseases does extend beyond those communities..  I didn't really read in that so first off, I noticed that that book was written me to get published in 2007..  Few things have happened since then, in the world, it would be interesting to see an update on all the planning on it, but..  I didn't really read it any suggested solutions that chapter anyone get a sense that they're like..  Even like a suggestion of how we should approach that..  Part of this broader issue, and I was like this chapter selected because I wonder if there's any more towards the end that..  Either together and that solution, but I can also see that you celebrated talking about where you're laying out all of these different parallel examples, just to get some reason you know every name right..  It is hard to imagine what the world was like in 2007 honestly like..  All the social people that has happened since then, like black lives matter didn't exist for them..  That was even before me to..  write it was before the financial crisis..  that the world is now different in some very important ways it's the same in very important ways to to some degree..  Any other comments about the medical apartheid chapter and what issues were discussed anything that we missed..  about the interview..  We see those about like how race like how you rank race is in medical practice..  And a couple things that we found particularly striking what's the bit where a lot of positions just that the eyeball race, as if that's like after at all, and they just..  I don't know just kind of take that for granted as if it was accurate and then also the part where the crux synthroid earlier we built into on the devices such that, even if an individual practitioner wanted to try to..  Like involved less race in their own practice there's still a limit to how much you can do that because all the devices they're using are some programs that they call it now..  And it's not an isolated thing right, one thing that actually I learned what I didn't know is that we talked about this parameter..  Last time, and I just had one device up there, but apparently like all manufacturers are many, many manufacturers different manufacturers include that in their software so it's like a..  it's a convention..  and.  You know yeah to that point like doctors are in kind of a tough tough position right, so they probably need to have some kind of amount of vinyl you to call it justification..  For the choices that they make, and if they use the device that is standard..  That includes this racing number in it and they decide well I don't want to use that number one use the southern number what rationale with Derby stuff..  Like there is one, clearly, but what number and so they're in this tough situation where they this like you're saying baked into the system like it's in the software itself and in order to they wanted the evidence based I guess you know, take a test and therefore within the test that..  indicates this some particular treatment..  So yeah even when it's it kind of reminds me of Europe or from the algorithmic bias collectors when Facebook was..  told to remove race as a variable from some of its ad targeting things and they did that and the biases didn't go away..  Because these changes are resistant for so many reasons, like like you were just mentioning..  So let's go back to medical apartheid did anything surprise you about that..  The talking..  About like little children didn't have HIV and she's like oh yeah..  That was rough..  Does anyone follow up on that, like that that might be like a rough but really important final project idea right like clinical trial with children, especially in..  Children who are, who are the responsibility of the state, for various reasons, like these sort of weird in between, where they they they're not autonomous and they don't have legal they don't have control over their bodies, but there's this weird interplay between the Foster system..  And the city and all these different things that I would be interested in reading a final project on that if anyone was..  willing to take it on..  Without those thousand top section I was surprised that too..  yeah, what do you like, what do you..  What would you do, what do you do in that situation where you have this population of children who are affected by disease..  But their legal..  what's what's the right word but..  yeah guardianship is..  To an entity, like a state, but if it's not a person even even the foster parents, even though they don't have that much control..  I wonder if that's still going on wonder where that's happening I can't imagine it isn't..  Anything surprising in the interview, where we go on this last..  question..  It might have been surprising if we hadn't covered it in lecture prior..  Alright i'm interested in your guys thoughts on this last question..  I don't have any answers this..  The fact that some people are like change the beds, I found not surprising..  Anyone brave yeah, let me make sure..  I don't I don't.

