---
---

# Data in Healthcare/Race-Correction and Health Disparities

**Date:** 4/7/2022

**Adam Labadorf (00:00:05.609):**  located in.  My name is it show.  me one.  Of the.  four.  inches in a row, to be that you.  Know lauren and triple Decker that I wanted to be super important.  Washington a lot oh.  yeah.  yeah and.  Thank you for listening.

**Felicity Crawford (00:00:57.660):**  things going into.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:01.320):**  I need to follow up with you about.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:03.390):**  what's gonna happen next week okay.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:06.780):**  I think i'm taking.  A loose the discussion on Tuesday and then we're going to figure out how to do lecture on Thursday.  So you plan on coming in person or you can have your resume.

**no speaker (00:01:17.400):** So.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:19.050):**  that's what I was expecting.  Okay cool i'll follow up.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:27.420):**  and fed said he was coming in right to be in the class.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:32.910):**  I think he said he was not able to do that next week, but I will.  Okay, so i'm going to step up for that.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:41.370):**  Thanks Adam sure.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:44.160):**  All right.  Okay we're great Hello everyone.  So, today is the second in our series of lectures of.  And so I don't know Melissa presented this class to you in this way, but when we were creating this class we found it helpful to organize the content into the two thirds So the first, third is like the past.  And that's linnaeus and all the all the background and all that.  The Middle is like the present.  And then the last third is the future and the last lecture in this lecture kind of goo represent and talking about issues related to the future algorithmic bias last time is pretty obvious algorithms are going to continue to rule our lives.  and related to that today.  we're going to be talking about data in health care, specifically.  And some of the history about why data medical data is the way that it is, and then.  Some discussion of current currently known disparities that we have discovered because of it, so before we jump into the lecture today's dedication, is to Dr Rebecca lead crumpler.  She was the first African American woman to receive a medical doctor a medical degree in md and she attended the New England female medical college, which became Bu school of medicine, which is where i'm about to number.  And she left Boston, this is an 1831 8095, so this is like during the civil war and she actually left Boston I think she lived in beacon.  charlestown especially I think somewhere somewhere over there, she left the Boston area to go treat.  Free black slaves would fought in civil war, because why doctors are not giving them do attention.  And she wrote this book.  A book of medical discourses which is basically the predecessor of what to expect when you're expecting, which is a very mean I haven't read it full disclosure, but apparently is a popular and useful and famous book about maternity.  and her elbow because there's be can help so her her home is part of this Boston women's heritage trail, which is a thing it's like a we can walk along this trail, and there are, I only learned about this naturally when I was researching.  Dr complex, but there are no photos of her that are known, and so this is just a picture of her purple.  So this is today's dedication.  All right, Dana and healthcare, so the first half of lecture i'm going to give a little bit of the history of the date of how data how healthcare became a data field and then second part of lecture will talk about risk reduction and some disparate health, health care about how we.  What the current state of that is.  So, be the first known medical record actually comes to us from ancient Egypt it's written in.  This script this this actually came, it was presented at an gallery in.  guggenheim actually New York who's in a like a an art gallery.  And those who can read whatever language, this is in they recognize it as like a surgeons notes they're talking about some sort of trauma.  That they were treating and how to treat that trauma, but in fact the purpose of medical records, even from way back then was for teaching purposes, it would be clinicians or surgeons that time or the whatever that the equivalent was.  writing to inform future surgeons how to handle certain situations.  And so there was that up until very recently there was always this sort of pedagogical purpose to these medical records.  And another interesting note is that up until very recently, the past couple Hundred Years basically Doc the only doctors were trauma surgeons, because if you had any sort of other disease mental health.  infectious disease that was the provenance of the gods and you will go to see a priest, so it was really only trauma if you get hit on the head with a rock or some other device.  And that was the area for doctors and so that's what this this is describing apparently is some sort of how to treat some sort of blunt trauma.  And the medical records remain that way for a very long time.  But I have on the left is an actual medical record taken by a doctor in 1823, this is what medical record used to look like they were narrative long written out beautiful handwriting.  And they described in a narrative form what was going on with each patient now, this was also at a time when, if you.  If you could see a doctor, it meant that you were affluent and the doctor would come to your House rather than you go into a hospital, there were no public hospitals, around this time.  They were there were places where sick people were put, but they were not hospitals now we're in a very short amount of time.  The medical record transformed radically with that transition from individual health care in in estates and homes to public hospitals, one of the earliest large public hospitals actually.  was born in New York City.  And the medical records transformed radically when that happened for lots of reasons, but instead of this long narrative form suddenly we have tables.  And so, these different columns you can read them to this one says medication and diet and some notes number, a number of schools, the amount of urine.  And the results of some sort of medication and the condition of patient, and I think each.  can't really read this here.  Each one of these is a visit right, I think, and possibly different patient so pretty radically different and we've gone from this longer pros form to just tables and numbers.  And just to, and I mean this was in 1899 right, this is from the New York hospital.  So in the 19th century, you might have something like this, so the first symptoms always affect the extremities of the limbs, and the lower limbs, particularly when the whole body becomes affected.  The order of progression is more or less constant and they go on to describe in detail what these different what the symptoms are.  But today, you might see something like this.  One of my I talked I showed this to one of my clinician colleagues yesterday, and she says oh yeah so vital signs stable.  She wasn't sure what the next thing was oh two starts okay so oh two levels are fine no increase Adelaide she was relatively quickly able to recognize that this is.  code or someone who had been seen for liver function like that's what these things tell you, and what you said no, this in Florida took 65 minutes and involved a high degree of complexity and decision making and.  She said that's for billing.  Because when insurance agent.  Well i'm not sure who the person is but they evaluate visits.  To they need to in order to be to build for them the clinician needs to justify the fact that you know for billing what they were billing.  And so, this is nothing at all to do with the patient, this is talking directly to the insurance company to make sure that they get compensated for the length of time that they use, so how many how different could they be these two forms right, and this is where and on the right, in fact.  What my my colleagues said is that they're moving moving away from this brief narrative form back to tables and codes and various things like that, because even this there's it's too onerous for both doctors and insurance companies to actually spend that much time.  To specify this.  So you might wonder like this looks this is tough, this is code, this is all encoded right like you need specialized knowledge to do this well.  It should come as no surprise that almost as soon as computers became available people started suggesting that they should be used to create an electronic form of our health records and the first introduction of this idea was by this learned speed is a doctor a clinician, and so the.  This was the paper in 19 1968 the moon landing was 1969 remember so just to put that in context here.  and  This this person is largely credited for the move to the electronic health record and coding these things in our computer systems rather than reams of paper and books things of that nature, so this is the example.  That they gave he has in this paper of sort of the code that was written at the time and his suggestions for how to actually you know encode this into an actual medical record.  And there's a lot of detail in here as well.  But the point that he wanted to make and that's, this is a quote from the end of this paper is that the university education.  A physician receives suggest that his attitude than 1968 his attitude should be scientific and focus, but the multiplicity of tasks that confront him during this clinical training often defeat to this goal.  He can act as a scientist, however, if you're able to organize the problems of each patient in a way that enables him to deal with them systematically like this sounds like personalized medicine almost back in 1968.  And so I would say that that was his first name warrants was somewhat pressure and, at least in principle.  and his understanding of these the potential of these electronic systems, but of course at this time, like data was being stored on these big drums computers were the size of rooms.  And when you had a bug and your computer program sometimes it was literally a bug like i'm off, but into the computer room and it shorted something out that's where the term comes from.  And so, this is where he saw this going, and this is indeed where it went so today the modern health record contains a tremendous amount of information.  And not even just on health right there's administrative and billing data, of course, right up front patient demographics.  notes on progress vital signs medical histories diagnoses and medications immunization dates all these things that we all have allergies, the actual some of the imaging that we that we take as part of our regular care and and labs and test results.  And so the idea here is that the ehr the electronic health record is much more than just a computerized version of a paper chart it's so much more information than that.  Because again somewhat pressure and Lawrence saw that the clinician needs to manage.  and be aware of a huge amount of information about a given patient.  to the point where you know, look at all these different people who are involved in your care, so there are labs media labs done specialist.  Medical imaging facilities pharmacies emergency facilities and then school and workplace clinics all of your your school nurse all of these people are involved in delivering care.  And the amount of electrical health record like imagine trying to collect all the information from all those people and writing them in the book by basically not possible.  And this is basically the current state of our electronic health records every one of you has some trail like this embedded in some systems.  So now health is something over data science at least we're getting there and the field of health informatics is the field of science and engineering.  That aims at developing methods and technologies for the acquisition processing and study of patient data which can come from different sources and modalities, such as electronic health records diagnostic test results and medical scans.  So now we're talking about health informatics and that is trying to learn things about individuals, health and population health using these data, and in fact there are lots of examples of these data being used to.  Go good effect to identify patterns that you might not that an individual clinician, even if they see hundreds of patients in a year they may not notice, so this paper.  They sought to.  examine.  The.  The various health comorbidities associated with obesity.  I think there's health this study came out of a large health system in Midwest think I remember.  And they were studying basically these health electric electronic health records from this one large health system and look for issues that go along with being obese.  And not surprisingly, so they organized individuals into.  The BMI bins of BMI body mass index, which is a measurement of your obesity.  and looked at the relative rates, the practice the fractions of people who had different conditions based on these bins.  And as you might expect the higher your BMI, the higher the fraction of people presented people who have been diagnosed with these other conditions so very simple like they just took the data and you tabulated it based off of BMI and different conditions.  And they found patterns that and I think everyone has a notion about, but then i'll be quantified it, at least in this one wasn't integrated health system.  There are other databases, so one of the limitations of this is that this study was that it used to only a single integrated health system.  So it's not you know, everybody so limited set of patients and you might imagine you can predict something about the demographics of individuals in a Midwest integrated health system.  But Fortunately, there are other databases that make electronic health records available for larger numbers of people and qualified investigators can access them.  and ask questions of these data, so the all of us researcher workbench is one such database, you can log into it, if you, you have to apply for permission and have some credentials be associated with the hospital or university.  But it has all of these health records from all sorts of people that you can run analysis on.  And in this particular study.  But they were interested in in.  Identifying or phenotypic abnormalities that are associated with high risk individuals of developing lung cancer so like what.  Conditions or predictive of someone eventually being a high risk for lung cancer, this might be advantageous from a clinical perspective, because if you intervene in cancer early you're much more likely to have a positive prognosis.  So what they did was they analyzed is some number of millions of electronic health records to look for the.  Association.  of being in a high risk.  lung cancer group with a whole bunch of other disorders so each column on the X axis here is a different disorder split into a bunch of different types of disorders and the y axis is the association with high risk of lung cancer.  And i'm sorry this was the the best resolution that they had in the paper, but like the things that had high association on things you might expect, so substance addiction and disorders, you have a substance addiction, or some sort of disorder you're at a high risk.  of developing of having high respond cancer tobacco use obstructive chronic bronchitis, chronic airway obstruction or post op or cpd.  alcoholism emphysema and then other things that we're not quite as clear like delirium do to conditions classified else, so if an individual has delirium of some sort there's a chance that they are at high risk for lung cancer.  So while they just they discovered some very you know well known patterns, they found some other things that might not be quite so obvious, and this is all from analyzing these numbers so some thousands of patients.  Through this workbench.  there's another interesting study where they use electric electronic health record and demographic information.  So there's another another critical aspect of care is when, especially in hospitals that are very busy.  triage is really important, so someone comes into an emergency department so something wrong with them.  The the triage nurse has a limited amount of time to decide where to send that person what sort of care to give to that person.  And you know, depending on what the condition is a person may might be sent to the intensive care unit, or they might be sent to the general award depending on the severity.  And if you send the wrong person to the wrong place there may be dire consequences for that patient.  So the purpose here was to analyze the data that they had for patients that came in the demographics other aspects of their standard test results when they're admitted to emergency room.  and try to predict whether they should go to the intensive care unit or sent to the general war, so this is the the.  figure from the paper to the triage nurse makes the CSI stands for emergency severity indicator I think it's like a code that they score that they assigned to patients that come in for how severe their.  Their condition as and then the emergency department patient triage position they collect information on these individuals.  And they included it with a bunch of other pre existing data as well as the outcomes that the patients had, and there are other demographic information they took this patient representation it built the classifier which is basically go to the icu or not.  And they tried to learn what features Burma.  These are some of the variables that they recover they collected so he'd wait I this PSI measure which is an emergency it's very in depth, or something like that how many medications the person taking how many images of that patient had how many diagnoses to the person have.  How many procedures, how they had, and these are all things that they collected on each of these patients to decide to train their model.  needs is definitely to get lab or.  Anything the average longer lab work.  Right yeah, no, no.  No hold on following is three in the er I mean that's that's amazing that's a good question i'm not sure I don't remember the number like what the numbers mean behind this I mean yeah that's a good question, though, like.  How often does, on average, someone get yeah I don't know I don't know the details behind the table, but you're right, you know per episode air like exactly like that also in practically I guess it gives me that hospital a lot right.  yeah well, I mean the great questions because the questions you have to ask when thinking about well let's say, well, let me go on to this, so they found that their model was actually pretty accurate.  In predicting who should go to icu versus not, this is all done.  In an RC or receiver operator characteristic perv basically shows you how accurate, you are if your prediction is exactly random the line is right along the diagonal but if it's above the diagonal means you're doing better than random.  And so they have some like predictive accuracy, but like we talked about last time, what does accuracy mean I mean a number of things and also depends on you know who who your demographics are, how do you interpret the data so to your to your point.  Depending on you know some of your own demographics might some of these measures be correlated.  Like these last ones you're right they're all about like delivery of care, so people who are delivered more care are going to have more numbers.  Who gets delivered more care or who gets delivered less here in our context right i'm not gonna answer that question but that's, the question we need to ask.  But still, like this after C curve point eight is really high that's really good accuracy, for an algorithm like this.  And so, even if there are biases in the data for saving lives here like you're saving lives, both by sending the right people to get intensive care when they need it.  And by making those beds icu beds available by not filling them with people who don't need back here so real impact this this prediction might have have.  So just Those are just a couple of examples.  But you know the types of health data like what is health data.  Originally it started off with basic but you know basic information about medical history and also your your family tree your heredity your your genealogy.  But somewhat quickly.  You know, when people started developing Apps for drugs and tests for drugs.  Soon after that they started after they had collected enough information about patients through all these different tables and books.  They can start to subdivide people, based on their demographics so demographics so segmentation is essentially the process of separating people into different groups based on different.  attributes that they have and then infectious disease like understanding, I told me on germ theory and all those how that intersects with health.  In the 70s imaging technologies came on the scene, so this is MRI or functional MRI and histology as well, so microscopy taking samples from people and actually staining and i'm looking at them.  And now, of course, we're in the age, the post genomic era where the human genome has been made publicly available, so your genetics are involved in your in your medical care, your epigenetics as well, maybe, maybe part of your care.  wearables and our data that we collect on our phones there aren't that trials out now for parkinson's patients that use their smartphone like their iphones to track tremor like.  daily and passively.  And we're about right here, I would say.  For just now on the frontier of using all these other types of information.  As part of our health.  Right.  But, of course, all of these as as more studies are conducted and more types of data are collected on more people.  We will learn more and more of the usefulness of those data.  But, of course.  I mean, who has.  No smartphones that can collect data on them, not everybody.  And so there's still certainly biases built into the data collection, that we talked about last time.  So a quick sidebar when I was creating this this slide deck I just went out and did a Google search I search for demographics.  And one thing that struck me, and I know this is the definition of demographics demographics are like what are very a demographic is like a group of people that's distinct from another group of people.  But it struck me how even just the way that we visualize this in fundamentally divides people it like split people up and makes them seem different.  it's kind of baked into our our terms is distinguishing between people and you can see that visually just by doing an image search I was a little taken a.  little disappointed when I did this.  So just to have a couple more examples of how these more modern types of health data are useful for us.  There are now a number of studies showing that, if you take fmri instructional MRI images of your brain.  or elderly, you can with some predictive accuracy identify early stage alzheimer's disease so early stage alzheimer's disease is very difficult to detect because the symptoms might be very mild so mild cognitive impairment, is one of the things that.  might be an early stage of alzheimers disease, but you know real Alzheimer disease that leads to people being fully demented has pathology associated with it and there's actually something that aggravates in the brain and there are.  changes to the structure of the brain in people who have died of the disease, and when we look at their brains, you can see them.  These imaging techniques, essentially, give us an opportunity to look into a person's brain before they have passed and possibly before they have developed significant symptoms.  Such that they can you can make health health decisions about that, and in this paper they did essentially this where they downloaded some brain imaging information to these are fmri.  And they did a bunch of pre processing that had some structural mris as well from some of the same individuals they did a whole bunch of.  Computer vision and feature extraction, so this is like deep learning stuff image analysis to extract features from people who have no early all timers do have early entrepreneurs.  And then they created all these really complicated networks models for the prediction I don't know if any of you have ever tried to read a image processing paper but oh man it's like another world really deep expertise is required to do this kind of thing.  And you know but fundamentally all you're doing is you're going from a picture to a number, those are now some it's incredibly complicated.  But we can do this now, this was actually published in 2019, which means that the studies have been conducted before that.  And so, this is, this is the present and now the future it's not quite part of care, yet, but it is definitely on the horizon.  So deep learning and talked about this a little bit last time, but since deep learning is such a big.  topic, there are lots of examples of people trying to apply deep learning methodologies to human health records.  So for cancer diagnosis 3D brain reconstruction so for people who have maybe structural abnormalities in their brain that's causing certain to a psychiatric disorder, you can actually reconstruct that.  Using deep learning all timers disease diagnosis tumor detection symptoms monitoring disease production epidemiology if i'm not i'm not going to obviously go into these, but each one of these is a.  one or more papers that's applying a particular deep learning method to a particular application, and this was.  published in 2017.  So that gives you an indication there's a lot of work being done in this area.  So this is my last slide almost whoa wow even close my last slide all right.  But it was my last night, it looks like the last slide um but anyway, so now that electronic health record data is definitely part of our ecosystem.  we've noticed that there's lots of challenges associated with analyzing it its enormous there's many petabytes of petabytes of health record data out there.  it's highly heterogeneous and one of the biggest challenges is that it's sensitive and legally protected this patient information is about people and so exactly how can you use these data, in a way that protects people's identities, is a really big big area of research.  And the problem or related problem is that all the data almost all the data are proprietary they are locked away within electronic health record systems.  within certain hospital systems or.  You know all throughout the country.  and hospitals are huge.  they're very complicated and in this country, for better or for worse for better and for worse, hospitals are obliged to take anybody.  Regardless of whether they have health insurance and so running a hospital is immensely expensive and so just implementing a health record system within a huge system like that is immensely expensive.  These are just barriers to incorporating these and the systems actually are disincentives to talk to one another right, these are for profit companies producing electronic health records software.  And what's it's an incentive to they have to have them talk through this their software systems talk to one another there's all sorts of privacy issues there's all sorts of problems.  And there's no standardization for that, even if they go and talk to each other, how do they use the same language is no standardization for that either.  And then finally.  In order to use this data, it requires all these skills that you develop professional doesn't have statistics computer science software, like all these things that you're not training.  On with obamacare there was a mandate that health systems, or at least it was an incentive at first and, eventually, it became a mandate that providers must opt into electronic health record systems, so there they were incentives at first.  But then they became required for this reason they didn't say which system they had to use they just said, you need to store your data electronically, rather than just in in files.  And so, related to one of the topics I mentioned earlier, if any of you ever had to fax something somewhere, some people right like antiquated systems, this box article I found very interesting like much of what happens in medicine still runs on facts like similes.  And there's reasons for that.  That are not just like they're lazy.  Because, just like with different electronic health record systems.  Have like providers are kind of competing with one another, like your family doctors Office like they're if they send the patient to a radiology Center they're like sending their business away.  So they're not really incentivized to talk to each other in that way, either from a financial perspective and upgrading this from facts to a new system is really complicated and really expensive, and so there are major barriers to.  From organizing and communicating electronic health record the way that it could be.  And there's hundreds of software companies that produce electronic health records systems epic is one of the most common ones I think they use that in pmc but there's a bunch of other ones too, and they don't talk to one another as far as I know.  they're all different.  I mean, I would imagine, in principle, most hospitals are trying to solve the same problem right most general hospitals.  But this is a for profit, business and so there's there's there's so many like disincentives baked into the system that make this third child care.  Another challenge that we have is that no clinicians need to be convinced.  Of the the value of being trained in these electronic health records and in genomics in order for them to use it.  and not all clinicians are like they may be writing skeptical of you know how.  Their perception of these new data analysis techniques and the new like genomics knowledge, new technologies.  They some might need some convincing.  Because there's a very real principle so have any of you heard cautionary principle.  No.  sounds kind of.  sounds kind of obvious, but this arose in out of I think Germany in the 70s.  Out of the.  Like during the Silent Spring era, the first worldwide like recognition that then we're doing damage to our environment and we should protect it.  The precautionary principle is abroad epistemological philosophical legal approach to innovations.  with potential for causing harm.  Right when extensive scientific knowledge on the matter is lacking.  It sounds a little bit like the Hippocratic oath right do no harm and that's very often why clinicians would make decisions like if there is some risk if the risk of harm of a particular treatment is greater than the benefit, they have to make those judgments.  and  For this reason, many clinicians maybe even if they believe in the new technology, even if they believe in its promise, they may not be willing to take that risk for their patients because there's too much uncertainty.  And we're put into the situation where it's like well, you need the data to know that works, but if you don't have people generating the data you don't know if it works and so that's another one of these really tricky problems that we have to build it.  yeah look before you leap hey.  That is my last one, for the first part.  So I hope that i've given enough background and context into all these different types of data and some of the issues that we have that determine our health right like doctors use this information.  Whenever we goes and seek treatment.  And their major challenges to.  Like there's got to be how we can effectively employee and use electronic health record information in this context.  Any questions about this.  First up lecture is easy.  we'll see in the second half lecture is not been so easy.  Alright, so let's take a five minute break welcome back.

**no speaker (00:39:49.230):** No. yeah. Right. one. In. here.

**Adam Labadorf (00:40:52.140):**  One yeah in.  store yeah just.  Take it all in.

**no speaker (00:41:05.520):** One submission. wait so long.

**Adam Labadorf (00:41:13.200):**  Where we're going so far as a.  result yes.

**no speaker (00:41:21.720):** He. wanted. well. yeah. hey. Thanks. So.

**Adam Labadorf (00:42:58.500):**  It.  yeah.  Exactly.

**no speaker (00:43:20.190):** Right. Oh. So.

**Adam Labadorf (00:44:39.570):**  let's go.  The first part of this lecture was about health data.  and  One of the things that I talked about doing with health data is that you can divide people into different demographic groups and look at the data associated with those groups to determine like to assess differences.  So in this sense.  electronic health record data can in fact be an important tool and understanding, where disparities exist.  and  We may not know the reason why those various exist from the data, but at least we can identify them.  So this so this part of the lecture is all about health disparities and and how we can use data to in some ways, assess our.  Differences between groups.  As well as in some ways, how these data and demographics, can be used to lead to or these misuse, I should say to to lead to poor health outcomes.  also start back in 1915 so this paper, the diagnostic value of placental blood film and most of all tumble malaria, this was in out of income, Panama.  By a physician, who was treating local people's work with women pregnant women or malaria, by looking at the malarial some properties of their sample blood.  And so it's a it's about the clinical and an epidemiological study.  And Panama at the time.  was subdivided into largely a groups white American whites and blacks and some other levels right, so we have North American whites you have Latin Americans which the term they use business D so.  And then whites of European origin, rather than Americans and West Indian black people.  And he tabulated the number of women examined.  Looked at the number of positive identifications of malaria.  And then, also the percent of those individuals and surprise, surprise.  The the black subjects had a much higher rate of malaria than anyone else.  And so, while this you know this sort of finding was not new.  What this clinician did I think is actually somewhat admirable.  And at the end of the paper said.  This, this is a section from the end of paper.  So white women coming from separate from the temperate zone United States in Europe live in the canals and I believe to be the most susceptible women to malaria, so they believed so probably rightly.  White women from North America and of European descent are more susceptible to getting malaria, for various reasons.  But nearly all the women and the Americans avail themselves of all the opportunities afforded by the system of sanitation, as well as professional care.  So while they are more susceptible they have a low, you would think they would have a higher rate of malaria, but they don't okay.  And so right in here is this recognition that even though that's kind of backwards from what we would think it was a recognition that these women were able to avail themselves of the opportunities.  That does not seem unusual he goes on to say for the highest rate of infection to be found in the series in the black women because they live under limited circumstances, chiefly in the suburban divisions of Panama city or the rent is lowest malarial ratings highs.  So right there social determinants of health right like 1915 this was not a new idea recently people recognize this.  And what is even more, I thought interesting at the end is if the same rate and character of infections in the white woman was in the bathroom was kind of the white women.  It would certainly have been accompanied by with more serious consequences, I don't know what those consequences are what he means by that but clearly there's a recognition of disparities.  Based on social determinants.  So quick sidebar the way I found this paper was I actually went to pubmed how many of you have been to pubmed almost everyone awesome.  And I just typed health disparities into pubmed my perspective, and I did this, and this was in the fall.  And there was one paper in 1915 has it that strange I think 15 so I investigated that that finding.  And when we dive in a little bit more, so this is the total find that uses the numbers of papers right so number of papers per year related to health disparities.  Between 1915 and 1970s, there were nine and the first one happened to event in 1915, and again I did this in the fall and four papers came out in 2022 based on pubmed in the fall so.  interpret that as you will.  2021 maybe they have some hot stock tips I don't know, but there are publications like next year's model right like card yeah go out and buy the 2023 model and report I don't know why they were popular articles in pubmed for next year.  We have like articles that are going to be published already filling up like the quarter three quarter for additions and so like we've done this published in December, but I feel like barely do so I wonder what it is that yeah it was like November, December yeah.  So anything see it on the website domains by 2020.  So, but just that this is how the paper, the way.  But today there's 84,000 results I mentioned health disparities from roughly.  1980 only.  And so I read.  them all.  Basically I didn't read them all, I didn't read the 5000 papers.  Last year, they got people in the class laughter that job as a source of certainty it's only against.  loosen up.  But I did serve a large number of these papers for evidence of like what when a paper was marked as being annotated with health disparities what was that about.  So.  We have health disparities that have been identified among for cancer not surprising hey.  This is really very well known there's lots of disparities among cancer.  There are racial and ethnic and health disparities in a reproductive medicine and you know evidence based overview right, so we have evidence of these things.  kidney disease there's.  So burden access and disparities and kidney disease, this is actually an Argentinian journal, so it was translated into English and Spanish.  Lucas.  This health disparities associated with lupus.  autoimmune disease.  And asthma and sometimes these you know health disparities, they mentioned about social determinants of health.  And asthma so just briefly, I know we know this, but the social determinants of health or the economic and social conditions that influence individual group differences in health steps right so.  there's all sorts of different social determinants of health, you have economic stability issues your neighborhood in your physical environment, how much education, you have the quality of abundance of your food.  And community and social context, and then the health care system that you have access to all of these are social determinants of health.  and obviously absence here is genetics, so that is not part of US they're all the things about where and how we live.  cardiovascular disease worldwide raspberries.  or they just discuss Similarly, as before, what are the disparities between different groups of people.  Over 19 course there are well documented and really terrible disparities.  In how people are affected by over 19.  diabetes.  Health disparities pop diabetes is another one of those conditions that's highly associated with certain determinants of health.  epilepsy neurological conditions associated with social determinants of health.  And then mental health as well, of course, where we are where we need to go, and these are all 1418 2021 2016 2020 2019 So these are all just in the past couple years.  But, of course, you know this class we focused on race, but races, far from the only some way of inviting people to identify disparities um there are health disparities associated with disabilities so among women who do not have disabilities their health disparities.  And this was an interesting perspective that any in.  This person's opinion is that men issues specific really men's health are actually often neglected, because so much attention is paid to these other divisions, the so.  race, gender and when you talk about yeah so that they brought up the fact that there are indeed do many of these health disparities affect men as well and it's something that that maybe is not as recognized as it should be.  there's discussion of.  Health disparities, not just based on economic factors, but even access to green spaces right so that's part of your environment shows determinants of health.  And how green spaces are associated with much the are positively correlated with all sorts of different health outcomes, the more green space, you have available to you testable.  The healthier, you are there's, in fact, been studies, where patients and hospitals with windows that overlook varied and green scenes tend to fare better than ones that don't have windows or don't have of that.  Of that view.  And so, not only do notice disparities and green spaces, but they also pretend like potentially suggest some ways of changing that if you have access to green spaces, but, of course, not everybody does.  there's Another aspect which of disparities which has to do with the world how so the divide between the rural and urban in this case is rheumatology so during this us.  And there was this term structural urban ISM which i'd never heard before but structural urbanism contributes to poor health outcomes for rural America our hospitals, as mentioned are huge they're very expensive and they're designed to serve large numbers of people and that economic.  The Economics of big hospital systems and cities simply do not extend to rural areas.  But there's there's they're still run that way you hear these really awful stories about how hospitals in middle America are shutting down and they're just like no hospital nearby.  Because they can't run because they're they're looped into the structural organism sort of paradigm or these that's the the the.  These authors.  that's what they believed part of the reason.  And, of course, our burning questions is a, not only does this doesn't only exist in this country.  But these world urban's various other countries as well, and so, everyone must be wondering about how Canada is doing and how does it compare with Australia very specific article, but this is not the only place we're not the only place where this these sorts of disparity exists course.  and  Clearly lots of sources of disparity health that strongly influence our lives.  So, of course.  let's return to the issue of race.  And i'm going to drill into this article, a bit.  Where they look specifically at the disparities between black and white of return burks and take looking trying to determine exactly how much of a contribution is race to this to preterm birth incidence.  Now, before I talk about the results, I want to introduce this concept of primary adjustment, I mean have you heard of this term adjust for parents and maybe you know.  Well, so coburn adjustment is a statistical procedure where technically, technically speaking, you wish to remove.  unwanted or unrelated effects from some sort of outcome.  Right so let's take an example where you have a lab test from a hospital that has partial proportional to some physiological dysfunction so like kidney function, you have a test tells you what your kidney function us.  And let's assume that it that it works that it's actually correct.  And now, imagine that there are three hospitals in the local area, each one of them conducts these tests, maybe they use different companies, maybe some of them do it in house, some of them do it elsewhere.  And if you look at the distribution of scores from each one of these hospitals, you see this on the left, so the first side of this means i'm spread site to site.  Now you might think that well this test shouldn't.  shouldn't be different, based on the hospital, why would the distribution of tests be different, based on the hospital.  And so the the person analyzing this data might decide that this site is unwanted variation, but this is due to something else, something about the environment in which the test was taken.  Not about the patients and that we should remove this this variance the difference between sites and so prepared adjustment essentially does this.  it's it shifts the distribution of each of your sites such that they have a more consistent mean right so you've shifted your distributions around.  But now let's consider an example where we actually know what the hospitals are okay so tufts.  Boston medical Center and mgh mass general hospital again, this is just I made this up this is totally imaginary just to illustrate the point.  Now these different hospitals serve different populations in particular Boston medical Center is a so called safety net hospital, it tends to see more patients of color and who different and often more severe health issues.  So if we were to do the same sort of adjustment.  What exactly what effect exactly does that have.  So this lab tests for number higher means like worst couldn't function let's say.  by adjusting out the difference between, say tufts and dmc you're moving the overall distribution down.  And so, this might just by the numbers, make it seem like people at emc it will make them here to be less sick from the heart because it's reduced the numbers.  For patients at mgh mgh is a very wealthy affluent hospital and sees a very different population.  Their scores make that shift it up, which means that they appear to be more sick than they actually are.  And this is all from a like a standard statistical adjustment for various adjustment is a standard approach that is used.  So let's go back to this study.  The study was attempting to estimate the effects of this type of adjustment.  So in this table fade subdivided into women, mothers to mothers into preterm and very preterm birth groups, and they have further subdivided them into a non Hispanic and black non standard.  They the other adjusted so they did a model to say how much of the difference in preterm birth is associated with race.  And the one across here that just means that the White mothers were baseline and so 1.7 to that just means that black mothers were 1.72 times more likely to have remember than the white women.  And four very preterm the black mothers were three times as likely to have a very preterm birth and more than.  The other models these model, one model to they included other aspects of these women's demographics so social determinants of health.  And when they included those variables in the model.  The actual this so called odds ratio went down.  So other factors could explain these differences beyond just race Hello so clearly this race alone includes many other aspects of patients care, and this was true both for preterm and very preterm.  They instead of looking for.  A race, they also looked at a number of other variables so education they did the same thing, where they.  subdivided preterm and very preterm month, you know mothers and then stratified them, based on the amount of education that they had.  And then they were looking for differences, based on race, so again this 1.7 means that black mothers were 1.7 times more likely to have a preterm birth and white women.  If they had less less than high school, and this was for women who had high school some college, are all relative to that surgery or higher right so.  But the same idea persists, is that if you include additional variables that are related to social determinants.  The actual a parent's differences, based on race goes down.  And they went further to try to estimate exactly what the influence of all these different variables was.  So they included, in addition, so they split by a predetermined very preterm.  They looked at all sorts of groups right all sorts of different variables like which State they live in and how much did that influence the difference, the disparity between white women white mothers and black mothers population size, the income race and ethnicity says combined variable.  And marital paternity, so this one is was the mother is the father of the picture basically that's what this bar means has a tremendous influence in the disparity between white men and black women.  And so, this was one of the only studies that I found where they were like laser focused on let's determine as estimate the effect of race, specifically and look for other variables that might correlate.  And they found some things that positively influenced the difference and negatively influenced events.  So, clearly, including the the differences like they're these disparities are influenced by these different factors.  There, by including race in the model.  you're somehow justin for all these different things so mixture of all these different things right so let's just be explicit about this.  race correction correcting for race that's the term that people use.  that's what we're doing.  Instead of having sites between like data between different sites you're adjusting for different groups of people.  And all this does is it removes the variants associated with race, but as we learned in this class there's nothing biologically different about people of different races not consistently.  And so the effect in this example of including race in the model that makes black people seem less sick and they are in a may say again, I just made this up, this is not true.  And they make other groups seem more sick.  So that's race correction.  You remember this study I mentioned in the first time.  They included racing the model, the diverse production in the study.  So this was after correcting somehow for race, but they didn't mention that in the table.  That anywhere know.  So let's speculate what.  What is the effect of including race in this model right so let's just think about this.  We do know that rates of obesity, diabetes and pre diabetes is higher up there, that has been well documented, for a long time.  So with racing the model and again this is just speculation, you could analyze you could do the analysis of the data if you had access to it and actually detect these these changes, but i'm just speculating is because we don't have that information.  With racing the model but coincidence of obesity in these conditions, appears to be lower than it is.  Right.  Because you reduce the incidence of obesity, diabetes and pre diabetes in the result.  So, again speculation.  That means that the association between BMI and these conditions is under estimated.  In the overall population, but especially for for African Americans in the sample if they're even are any i'm not sure the study mentioned it.  But what does this do this means it's makes them appear less sick them absolutely.  Tremendous example from our.  lung cancer.  They just embrace in this in this model.  So let's let's speculate as to the effect of including raising this model.  After Americans have higher rates of cancer than other groups, you know that's true.  They also have higher rates of medical medical conditions in general, we also know that they smoke less than likes.  interesting.  So if you include racing the model again the effect is it makes the severity of those individuals seem less than it actually is, it is under estimating the association between lung cancer risk and clinical phenotypes.  Over this study.  They include rates in the model.  same story right, so I, so this is.  Your question prompted me to kind of front run this question a little bit, but i'll speculate on us.  These are they included race I didn't mention it, but they included right, so how like race interact with these measurements.  Anyone.  Depending on who's utilizing We already know that.  Developing a total patient mystery like the quality of our organization probably going to have more visits and more buyers right and so that would push you to the move to an ICO to get more hair right.  yeah possibly right that's definitely one thing, but I think also African Americans seek out less care and and when they do, they go later yeah.  So I could go either way right it's not clear i'm not really sure we'd have to like get access to the data and ask those questions if we could even do so.  But like again I don't I don't know what it means to include race in the model here, if you would have to do something like that previous study where they look specifically at what is the role of race.  After like a condom for all the other things that may be different, as well to identify that particular difference, and even then we're finding remembering something other than biology.  The point i'm trying to make is it's really hard to actually understand what you're doing.  When you adjust for race.  you're doing something right because you put racing the model and a statistician would say, well, you include racing the model, the model that variable is significantly associated with whatever variable of interest.  that's a signal of getting the model that's what a statistician would say and that's that's true to some degree.  But what does it mean.  And that is much harder to discern.  So, going back to this concept of a feedback loop right.  What happens if you systemically include raises a model that makes people of color scheme lasik than they are.  Well, that means that they continue to get sicker which exacerbates the differences between groups.  Which means that those variables capture more and more of the variance which might motivate people who aren't really familiar with what including race means in the model will make those differences even even more significant.  which might lead someone to believe that the differences are simply biological is a toxic feedback loop.  So Fortunately, there are people who are aware of this.  And there are publications coming out.  That like we talked about last time there, including knowledge of equity and and bias in their analyses they're actually looking for evidence of bias, because they correctly.  interpret differences between races, not as biological but it's also the logical social determinants.  And so, people are trying to do this.  This article from.  The Lancet makes this argument.  raise production should be about.  The things she was talking she starts off as articles talking about how her daughter was talking to her about some medical exam she had, and she had to fill out a form.  And the race, there was a race question on the medical forum that was white black or other or something like that, and she was like, why does my being black have anything to do with you know the health.  My health issues and how i'm being treated.  and dirty.  pop into this and wrote this article about it bring it to potential, this is just left here.  it's a great article highly recommend reading.  But there's.  Our health system is enormous and it's complicated.  And it actually the problem goes even deeper than we might even think, to the point where so here's here's my almost my last slide.  to the point where models that include race as a biological vector are built into devices themselves, like the actual.  code that is loaded onto devices, so this device on the right is Paul this parameter, it is it measures, the volume of your lungs and both the volume and velocity of your lungs.  You put your mouse over the mouthpiece there and the clinician instructs me to exhale as quickly as you can and the device measures, the amount of air flow and how quickly they're there the air flows in as a measure of.  What is it respiratory capacity and help people who have lung disease or have been smoking, for a long time have lower measures of these things, because their lungs function just is not as good.  Well, they.  From this 1999 paper these.  Researchers published this results that Caucasians but they call them.  So now remember white Caucasian is is a rope is a misnomer term.  Did we talk I don't remember if I mentioned this sidebar.  The Caucasians okay so Caucasian now is used as a like mean white.  But there's a PhD student the black Max program she was actually from Eastern Europe.  From the part of the world is known as the Caucuses.  And she was like she was filling out a form and she was like you know Caucasian or blackberries and she was like i'm i'm not Caucasian i'm from this other country.  Right so Caucasian is a misnomer and it's it's common to widespread adoption just because it is a synonym for being white, but of course it's wrong because most people are not from the Caucuses this particular part of the world, but anyway, and if sidebar.  I imagine if you use the word Caucasian you might be safe to assume you're not aware of all the issues that we've been talking about in this class so not a red flag exactly but shows you orientation.  So MTV is like.  experiment exploratory force experiment of on there's some slides and they found that in males and females surprise, surprise the white people had higher respiratory capacity.  than everyone else.  looks kind of predictable right white people on top Mexican non non black people middle black people the bottom.  But, of course, as we now know there's no biological reason why this should be true.  But this result was used to actually write the code that is loaded onto these devices.  And I don't know if you can turn it off.  The device itself when it reports this ftp one does this adjustment.  And so, in order to address this problem, you would have to like make new devices.  The company who makes the devices, we need to be convinced that they need to make the devices.  And this is just one device.  So this this notion that reason biological is even built into our hardware, like the devices w's.  and  i'm sure in ways that went out, even though we may not even be aware.  Right, so this is my last slide.  This is a pretty tough lecture I think.  But this notion of race, corruption is pervasive.  And it's often just mentioned as like an aside in a method section of the paper you have to look for it, I think, in one of those papers it wasn't even in the methods it was just like written as this was like a footnote on the table.  That was, it was the only evidence, there was that they had just for race.  and correcting as races are shown can lead to greater harm.  But that doesn't mean that first off a very correction is wrong, it is not wrong in general, it is actually very important, because if you do have systemic differences saved by hospital and you want to account for that.  And we should not include race blindly in our models, but that doesn't mean we shouldn't.  use that information right we can't ignore it.  And, in fact, we need to be aware of it, because as far as i'm concerned.  Disparities based on race is a readout of how we're doing as a society.  If there are differences, based on race, it means that we're not doing well, not.  Only when we get to the point where, if we put raising the model nothing changes.  Then.  we'll know we'll have a will have made some progress.  And like that the paper outreach on verse that I mentioned, like they use racing the model, but they did it well, like they did it right they did they use that information.  For the purposes of helping people in better understanding disparities, rather than just like blindly sticking it in as a special festival adjustment, because that variable significant in the model.  And there's no silver bullet solutions right like we have to go through, you have to think about it, like what we did when we speculated on what the potential effective, including race in the model is, you have to think about it.  And if you're conducting the studies, you have to test those models do it with and without consider different different possibilities of interpretation of that variable.  So that is all I have for today.  thought they would have.  fluffy pets.  You can go and like I know something that's how I feel after this lecture.  it's heavy stuff right.  Right.  So good questions and have a great rest of your day.

**Felicity Crawford (01:22:16.020):**  So, on Tuesday you'll be there.

**Adam Labadorf (01:22:19.920):**  On Tuesday and.  Also, the gym before boss on Thursday.

**Felicity Crawford (01:22:26.400):**  Okay.

**no speaker (01:22:28.140):** sounds.

**Adam Labadorf (01:22:31.170):**  Good thanks.

