---
---

# Project Presentations

**Date:** 5/3/2022

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:00:23.490):**  Is this your last class, by any chance.  No matter.  Oh.  Okay, the reason I ask is because I always get a kick, especially in the.  When i'm teaching ornithology because the biology students would have had me, for the first class.  Because it's Tuesday Thursday school starts out, Tuesday, at 1230 and I often have students that have had me, for the first class and the left and it's like a little bit of symmetry it's actually very nice.  And then, again, none of you guys, would you buy the taken by one of seven.  You might have had the very first lecture at Boston university.  that's so cool.  What we went through in the last four years just crazy stuff right.  Oh.  Is that what I didn't occur yeah that.  necklace it's gone crazy because.  The 400 people I had in the fall and most most is not ideal for election it's so far back in oh yeah you're sitting there looking at what am I gonna buy an Amazon.  This class What did you guys think I mean enjoy it.  I mean the verses from.  What she does with this classes is spectacular i'm sorry I was there for less money.  yeah feel it is doing well, nine pounds five ounces I heard yesterday so she's gaining weight.  You guys know who gives.  working.  ever been to a.  Public Health yeah that's right here yeah good.  Start masters classes last year and take them ma BA program yeah that's.  Not.  graduating.  Okay, all right good and try.  The new position.  There was an email, which I didn't get a chance to look at from.  professors one.

**Vamshi (00:05:14.490):**  Oh yes, yes, that was me.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:05:17.130):**  Okay, and you're gonna are you presenting online today is that what what what it said I didn't really get a chance to look at it.

**Vamshi (00:05:23.550):**  Okay yeah i'm presenting mine my presentation today so i'm kind of sick today.  Yes, really up to the class.

**no speaker (00:05:31.800):** Because.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:05:36.510):**  I thought that the best way of doing this is just.  Just bring up the computer and look it up, is that the best way to do it, is that process.  Just.  Because we're on zoom anyway.  First things first of all those who are graduating please stand up.  Stand up graduating graduating graduating graduating.  everybody else.  guys it's wonderful that you made it through the most credit an entire.  Okay, now I do not have a list of the WHO goes first so does anybody know they're going first you go okay.  So, are you on zoom.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:07:44.160):**  yeah.  hi friends.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:07:47.040):**  hi everybody there, she is how you feeling.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:07:53.400):**  Doing pretty good today.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:07:59.100):**  I don't know why I can't hear you.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:08:01.830):**  I see the class volume.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:08:03.210):**  mike's not on.  hold on.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:08:20.970):**  Okay, great.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:08:26.220):**  So Kemal you first up okay okay.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:08:31.170):**  um so before we get started, I just wanted to mention because there'd been a little confusion and I got some emails, so there is no sitting final exam for this class your final projects just do on Tuesday may 10 the date that the final exam would normally be.  And the link for submitting your final projects to a dropbox file is now up on perusal under the announcements.  As well as a link to a class survey, we asked you to fill out it's in lieu of the narrative for reflection that's mentioned in the syllabus so instead of making you write a page we just made a survey that you can do so.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:09:14.340):**  They have to also fill out the Bu course evaluation.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:09:18.870):**  Yes, so you know they'll get separate links for those that are from cast biology you'll get a link from the bio department and from those from engineering you'll get a link from Dave king.  And you know, at the end of class they'll probably be extra time if you wanted to work to complete those.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:09:35.370):**  Never do it at the end of class, but the other thing is.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:09:39.990):**  To leave Fred.

**no speaker (00:09:41.610):** Okay.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:09:43.290):**  So.  let's see i'm looking for.  Which one.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:10:03.750):**  Okay.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:10:09.630):**  Now, can you let us see you.  Now I don't think I have to share the screen I think it's automatically shared.  I can't share it's not fair.  right here, right now, security.  yeah and you say.  Wait wait wait.  Below ships.  Right, so we want to mute everybody else.  Let me just get back.

**Ananya Mishra (she/her) (00:12:25.950):**  Okay.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:12:33.150):**  So do you want to come from.  Okay, so you can unmute yourself on mute myself Melissa you'll tell us.  So turn it.

**no speaker (00:12:52.020):** off from up here.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:13:53.430):**  Myself you'll be muted yourself, and then we should be everywhere, Melissa can you hear us.  Melissa she's not she's not a yeah okay all right good.  So hi everyone i'm done yeah and today i'll be talking about my I guess very ordinarily named project racing medicine, past and present.  So I want to start by with a quote from Professor Carla l peterson, who is a professor of English at the University of Maryland college park.  And this book is from the book recovering the black female body.  So she writes when invoking the term body we tend to think at first of its materiality its composition as flesh and bones its outline and contours it's outgrowth of nail and care, but the body is we all will know is never simply matter, for it has never divorced from perception interpretation.  And to me that kind of captures, at least in part the essence of what we've been talking about all semester on specifically we think of Sciences medicine as these just objective and morally good field.  of study and practice and that's true to an extent, but we've seen time and time again that that's a fallacy scientists fallible medicine is fallible because the people studying it and practicing it are not neutral.  Third parties without their own biases, so it is important to consider how those biases conscious or subconscious plan to how we approach to medicine, so, in short, we cannot divorce, the body or what we think of as objective and true.  From how we proceed and interpret it in the social context.  So that's why for my project and trying to answer the questions of how race and racism, have has historically manifested in medicine and what legacy that history has left on the field today.  So America alters the world at large, has historically relied on.  harmful and oppressive institutional power structures, like slavery and settler colonialism on to marginalized communities of color specifically black and indigenous communities, for centuries, and they continue to do so today and disarm definitely extends to medicine and science.  So it's understandable to want to despise aspect of medicine to consider the history separately from medicine today.  Maybe, because we think that the positives of modern medicine outweigh the farm that they may have caused the past.  But to separate the positive impact from this honestly pretty dark and the various history is I think naive, at best, and actually harmful, at worst, because it allows the legacy.  Of that history and the current manifestations of to persist today unchecked so to understand issues with medicine, today, we need to look at issues mentioned in the past.  So, for example, who developed current medical practices with tools, how did they achieved, but what resources, did they have access to do that what factors influence access to health care today who decides these factors, what are, I guess, their biases.  And what harm has been and still is caused to these historically marginalized communities.  So to learn about the history and critically evaluate its legacy it's important for people in general, but especially students and practitioners of science and medicine.  To understand how their work today may draw from its history and harmful ways, and then we need to actively seek to improve the study and practice to prevent perpetuating this form so for my project.  My project, I want to increase the awareness of what role races played in medical progress and bring to like how racist iniquity in healthcare today, maybe related to or maybe even directly descended from this history.  So for my project is essentially intersperse saying historical examples of racism in different fields of medicine what present day examples of how racism manifests in those fields so.  An example is in the field of that apology so James Marion sims who is considered a widely considered the father of modern gynecology today he developed the first speculum which has.  revolutionized our new technology Harvard to do this back in the mid 1800s he ran very cruel and obviously non consensual experiments on enslaved black women sometimes as many as 20 to 30 times on the same woman.  Without anesthesia he believed and we've heard this before that black women are Moses pain and, quite frankly, the district is in my supplements.  And that's really relevant because that's still happens today disparities in pain management is still a major issue for black women and community of women of color in general.  Black women are still more than three times as likely to die during childbirth compared to white women and the rate of maternal mortality is still higher than any other group.  So, essentially the format is that i'm making a collection of pages.  it's like a book or magazines collection of pages so i'll have maybe more worn out journal entry like pages containing historical examples.  right next to me, the more modern textbook or academic journal like pages that detail the descriptions of examples of versus medicine today but rather than facts and figures.  So the main sources i'll be pulling from.  most prominently our books, I have a few listed here and i'm mainly be focusing on.  Medical bondage and killing the black body, because they specifically detail.

**no speaker (00:20:09.990):** Sorry.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:20:12.060):**  yeah so they go into the history of.  race based medicine and the harm it's causing the past I think they're really helpful because they to detail a lot of history that's not available and other sources.  On and but i'll also be using podcasts and then primary literature for present a data think podcasts are great because they provide a lot of information and really accessible ways.  huge range of topics and then from your literature it's good to I guess examine what's happening in these fields today.  We are a long story short, what I hope to convey on at the end of the project is, I guess, a sequence of things that we can do to tackle present day.  race based issues in medicine so essentially the first step is to actually acknowledge and examine the dark history of medicine and it's like a see.  Maybe even try to refocus the attention to the black and indigenous people who have unfortunately unwillingly contributed to these advancements instead of focusing on you know.  The white men were excluded these populations and then again, we need to examine the legacy of this history and use that examination to revise how we view modern medicine today so it's not just black and white, but what medicine is good and that's the end of it.  And then we need to again use that information to ensure that these historically marginalized groups do have equitable access to the health care that they.  help develop on against their will and, lastly, trainees information to actually actively operate at our racism and ethics into both teaching and practice of license.  So both students and practitioners can make sure that whatever issues exist today are not perpetuated.  Yes, we're ready yeah all right, did you have a good paper today is this.  roe V Wade yep now there's a couple of things that fit right into what you're talking about and the globe's article today we're on what this means to.  The black community.  And in addition to what you're doing when I have a section on the end what this is going to do now, this is exactly what is meant by ctr.  CRT because it is a law that has been passed by people who are not racist but it ultimately leads to systemic racism, and I think it would be really good as a summary statement in your paper to address what this particular or means, in addition to what you're doing I don't know if.  you're going to be able to say much but, according to all the figures there are going to be a lot of people aren't and most of them are going to be in the underrepresented minority.  yeah absolutely so I mean it'd be nice to you know go further, and I think that will really top of the.  Somebody chatting to us thread if you can share the global article later okay i'll.  Send that to you, yes okay all right um anyone else okay all right So yes, this is the way we will do it um I don't know who's next come on down.  And amanda everybody can now share right so.

**no speaker (00:24:15.750):** The. screen.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:24:37.980):**  what's.  Nice presentation.  or Jason scenario so for those graduating I learned a lot of exams still to take.  Those terrible need Professor.  i'm just trying to get it fully full screen instead of like showing the task on.  Yours that would work better oh mine doesn't have a PhD in my Okay, is this.  All right, Hello everyone my project is titled whose rights and introduction into individual liberties and collective good at health care.  So this is basically going to be an exploration into political philosophy and how it relates to individual liberties collective good and how all of that relates to health care in the US.  So my topic is basically going to be looking at these people action what rights as an individual have to what extent should individual liberties be restricted to preserve common good.  Who has the right to restrict these liberties and then whose rights are we as a society okay restricting.  there's a lot of different levels that this is relevant on at one of the most obvious is that there is an absolutely inevitable trade off between individual rights and public health policy.  There is no such thing as a robust public health policy that does not to some extent tell people what they can and cannot do with their bodies so given that this is an inevitable trade off we basically have to look at this issue.  And, and in this past we've looked at things such as the new word risk versus js case in medical apartheid.  That clearly shows how relevance can be so if you guys don't remember this was the case where a man with tuberculosis was essentially detained in a hospital for fear that he would.  go out and spread tuberculosis, because he has not yet not yet completed his medical treatment.  And then that obviously brings up some very important questions about like can hospitals team people when do they have that right, and if someone has a health condition that may affect others should they be subject to that.  And then obviously current events like the Covenant team pandemic have also made this and, especially, send me an issue, because with mass mandates there's obviously people saying.  Oh, this is a front infringing upon my bodily autonomy, this is infringing upon my individual rights, but clearly masks to do work so, then the question is like.  To what extent can the government mandate things like this and then, finally, as both a biology and philosophy student I have we believe in the value and importance of interdisciplinary learning.  Because a lot of times you'll see things like science, engineering that as polar opposite to the humanities and arts, however, I don't think that this is the case.  Things like philosophy and the arts teacher very important concepts and types of critical thinking that.  are incredibly helpful and important in science and can definitely improve your science, education, however they're not taught in.  Scientific curriculums a lot of times now, because people view these hours for opposites, so my goal is to kind of synthesize and integrate these two types of fields.  So for project detail is going to be a.  it's going to be a website and I chose the website, because I just believe that.  it's the most accessible very easy to access everyone forget to website, and given that my goal for this project is basically to reach as many people as possible, especially as many people in these fields.  I think a website would be the best, so the way my website is going to be organized is i'm going to be looking at three philosophical texts so i'm going to basically summarize the main.  ideas in those texts, I feel are irrelevant then i'll bring in Case studies from current medicine, such as the coven active pandemic and synthesize the ideas of how those texts deal with the ideas of individual liberty and come good with the case studies that we're looking at.  So just to give a little background on the kind of texts that I will be looking at first i'll be looking at Leviathan by Thomas Hobbes.  So Thomas Hobbes is a 16th and 17th century English philosopher he's considered one of the founders of modern political philosophy.  And he's most well known for his theory of contract carrion ISM which focuses on the concept of social contracts.  So house is known for painting a rather bleak view of humanity, where he says that we're essentially bound to descend into the state of war chaos destruction violence, unless we implement social contracts are enforced by fear and force.  And, and looking at these three philosophical texts, I want to basically tease out what is philosophers think about individual rights common good and different section of justice.  And perhaps justice is fulfilling one's contractual obligations in obeying the laws of what he calls the Commonwealth for the government.  And then, secondly i'll be talking about the second treatise on government by 17th and 18th century philosopher john Locke.  So you guys have probably heard this name, he was one of the biggest enlightenment thinkers considered the father of liberalism.  and his big theory is a theory of natural rights and his natural rights philosophy was incredibly.  influential on American political philosophy, this is reflected in the declaration of independence as a theory of inalienable rights.  So we have the last week of view of humanity compared to Hobbes but he's still very much influenced by hub social contract theory.  The secondary This is basically talking about how natural rights relates to social contracts.  And in his natural rights yells has a very heavy emphasis on property rights which we can also very much see in American political philosophy nowadays.  Because one important thing to know is that, while in the modern and Westernized world, a lot of times we think property rights are just you know, a very fundamental part of how we conceive of individual rights.  native American societies before colonization had a very collective view on property so it's important to kind of recognize where the roots of our philosophy came from, and it wasn't always like this in all societies.  And then basically john locke's conception of justice is that natural rights are not violated.  And these natural rights he considered to be right to life, liberty, health and property, which sounds very similar to the declaration of independence.  and justice is also one one has political freedom defined as not being under any legislative powers, except for those that were established by consent ahead of time.  And then finally i'll be looking at justice, fairness political not metaphysical, which is an essay by 20th and 21st century American philosopher job roles so he's almost a contemporary of ours, having passed away in 2002.  And is one of the most influential recent political philosophers his theory influenced a lot of contemporary Western law and political fox.  And while he's undoubtedly still very influenced by hops and lock him and how important they are to the western philosophical cannon he definitely takes.  A different angle on this and it's less focused on social contract, instead of big focus is the idea of justice and fairness.  And to basically illustrate this idea, he brings in a thought experiment that he calls the original position or the veil of ignorance.  To describe how theoretically and hypothetically wanted think of an ideal society has been structured so how the thought experiment works is basically consider you have.  A group of individuals that by some method or another, they have a temporary amnesia where they basically forget their age, sex, gender, race, economic class things like that, so they basically have no.  conception of where they stand in society, so these these individuals are now in the original position and behind the veil of ignorance.  roslyn states that it is in from this original position that ideas of how society should be structured should make because.  When you're in the original position is natural that you will come up with a structure that is.  Most fair because you don't you don't have any biases because you don't know where you stand.  So you would want to maximize fairness it's not once you're removed from the original position or place back in society, even if you're in the most disadvantaged groups, your position is as good as it can get.  So basically roles use this as a way to illustrate how we should create the most fair society so for him justice is founded on the most basic pillars of liberty and equality distributed fairly and adjust society would be one is chosen by those in the original position.  So my main thesis, for this is that restriction of individual freedom is warranted and necessary in so far as it is applied equitably and equally to all individuals and improves overall public health well being inequality.  And there is such a precedent for such restriction of individual liberties both worldwide, and especially in the US.  However, it is absolutely necessary that we're cognizant of how such restrictions are applied to those of marginalized groups to avoid exacerbating existing biases.  and important thing I want to know is that while this is my thesis my main focus with this project is not necessarily to get my readers to agree with this specific thesis.  Because overall my goal with this project is to expose people in general, and especially those in the science and health field, especially students to this kind of philosophical thinking.  Because healthcare necessarily concerns ethics and while there are career by law offices and ethical panels, whose main job it is to basically consider these questions.  I do believe that all doctors, nurses, health care providers, health care, researchers, should have a grasp on the kind of ethics that they employ beyond just doing what ethical committee recommends them do.  Because with a better grasp of where these ethical values come from what are grounded in there is necessarily a better understanding of how to implement apply it.  so well, I have my own thesis that you know I put my readers will agree with my main goal is basically to get people started on this kind of thinking and thinking about how it applies to healthcare and sides, so, in short, that is my project yes.  very interesting questions, please, are we allowed to ask questions.

**no speaker (00:36:34.590):** Okay.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:36:36.150):**  All right.  Now fascinating to.  Take the case of tuberculosis, I am curious how you move from that, from what standpoint, yes, so what what what are you looking for what are you going to say what would lock have said about preventing him from reading hospital.  Like what do I think walk walk walk and set and then we'll do oh.  it's a very big question so locked did believe that there could be certain restrictions on individual liberty, but still he Max.  He lean more on the side of prioritizing individual liberty, as long as it didn't directly affect others, so I feel like it is possible to see that lock would say that the detainment and this man is.  unethical.  Given that it doesn't necessarily directly affect others because there's no way for us to be sure that he will.  Definitely affect other people because lock was much more focused on direct like infringement on individual rights, such as like if someone were to attack the person.  So I think from lots standpoint also considering his scientific and medical like understanding of the time he wouldn't have been Okay, with the detain that that patient Okay, so now, the question is what would lock say about any kind of mandate to xmas.  I have to say the same thing right probably something similar, but then it's also very hard to.  For me right now to extrapolate what lock would have thought, considering the medical understanding is so different.  Because he, like back then there wasn't you know, a big germ theory and whatnot so I don't know if his philosophy would have evolved with this kind of scientific understanding.  Something like that in the writing of this final paper like lost their age, well lots theory, yes, but relevant to what's happening in today's world yes all right, and then the other thing that I was thinking was.  What we have experienced because of the political world we live in wouldn't have been different today than it would have been 10 years ago 20 years ago about eating Turkey in La.  And the other philosophers.  Another disease at a time sensitive ish this question of what was the question of how things should be interpreted and and does that come into play.  I think it definitely is because society, you know evolves in their philosophical thought, and I think.  American society, especially our political philosophy is extremely extremely individual, but I do think that in the past, maybe decade or so we have.  gotten a better understanding of you know, collective common good, especially with the globalization of the world, so I think it's possible that intent like 10 years ago, this might have been even.  more contentious but then also there's the idea that about 10 years ago was the SARS pandemic in Asia, so it may be one that was more suppressing people would have understood the urgency of my classmates and such I never thought of what you do after this fantastic Thank you any.  listener, can you do you like to contribute.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:40:22.200):**  So.  So I just I I mean I haven't had philosophy in like 20 years, but I feel like I remember one of there's a thinker from that era that said, like my rights and at your nose or something.  In terms of thinking about these things and I always think about it when they talk about the individual trade off between.  You know, a personal a person right versus public health good.  But I don't know if Jesse if you if that rings a bell at all, it might just me being me being random.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:41:00.300):**  Yes, definitely relevant, I think that particular post about how a lot of.  Political philosophers especially early ones that were talking about individual rights.  They mentioned that you know people should have full individual liberty until it infringes upon someone else's individual liberty.  So if you were to enact violence upon someone that would deliberately restrict them and their liberty.  So I think that is very relevant and like mentioned earlier, like it's very difficult to see what these philosophers would say.  In the modern world, because their conception of restriction on other people's liberties was often very direct like hand to hand combat things like that, so it will be interesting to look at that and also see what role has to say about it, since he's much more of a contemporary.

**no speaker (00:41:48.420):** Well yeah.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:41:50.850):**  Oh no sorry.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:41:52.470):**  I was just gonna say I always find it very interesting when it comes to some of the medical things like even the even coven because it's kind of like.  You know, do you consider that to be like you consider not masking to be doing violence in certain cases, and how would you argue that because it's not physical violence, but it is a threat so.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:42:19.470):**  So know we've over the years, submitted op ED articles to the glow I think jesse's work here if she could write up the previous version of what you're going to submit it to the globe as an op ED piece, that would be phenomenal don't you guys agree.  And it's so relevant to everything going on, it would be wonderful to see the perspective that are from this is great you.  know.  see what happens you submit a professor us once name on that, and then you know what's going to it should be really interested in, you may end up accomplishing something like that that's fantastic Okay, thank you.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:43:15.360):**  yeah, thank you for your interdisciplinary perspective that was really refreshing.

**no speaker (00:43:20.310):** Yes.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:43:30.300):**  it's coming up.  Stop sharing this is.

**no speaker (00:43:54.000):** share.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:44:00.750):**  So you would double major.  Policy minor.  As these issues, been discussed in your classes.  To an extent, yes, but not very much because most of my personal life course for the wall space more like metaphysics, and this is socialism or philosophy, but I thought so.  So I didn't do it.  Because crises.  Okay, so we our topic is maternal mortality rate in the United States.  And so we wanted to discuss.  Similar topic is discussing the child mortality rates across different races emphasis on largest effective, which is black and black women across adventure 300% more likely to die in pregnancy related complications when it's Mr Pat part white women.  So the reason for relevance or interest that we have in this topic is to bring awareness, to the general public through statistics and hard facts.  So, if you look at this graph of maternal mortality in the United States as compared to other affluent countries such as UK Canada Netherlands etc.  They have been on a steady decline and their maternal mortality, since the 1990s, whereas the United States has been on the steady increase since 2000.  So the United States has 26.4 deaths per 100,000 live births, as compared to the next runner up, which is the UK at 9.2.  And it's important to note that black women are disproportionately affected by such a staggering number and, by extension, the maternal mortality represents overall effectiveness of our health care system and general medicine.  We want to do a podcast for content format, with the emphasis on focusing on a very large general public, so people who are not actively engrossed in the field of medicine or even.  Within maternal Benson because the point is to spread awareness to just like any person on the street, not just some of you, this would affect personally, so we wanted to talk about the factors contributing to that within each episode.  The objective of our podcast is going to be to focus on the four factors that we believe affect.  The disparities and maternal mortality rates so for factors we're going to use episodes to talk about our access to quality healthcare.  Underlying chronic conditions structural racism and implicit provider bias, and we also believe that all four of these factors work synergistically.  and contribute to the widening gap between black versus white maternal mortality rates so if we look in 2007 the percentage of pregnancy related deaths in black women.  Was 34% and then just four years later, in 2011 it rose to 42.8% and if we compare that to white women there wasn't even a 1% increase.  Their sources on they're all pyramid or a lot of resources and one of them, and some work.  And we picked the sources, because they were pretty easy to understand when we read them and went through them so within our majors and just being kind of within the field of medicine and we thought it was pretty simple hopefully we can extend that HR public.  As well some said we've decided to select sources that were very easy to understand.  Because our target audience is the general public who are not actively engaged within the field of medicine, so they wouldn't be seeking out scholarly articles that maybe have difficult statistics or jargon.  We also wanted to include that each of the sources goes back to one of the four factors that we're going to talk about in our pocket.  And to summarize with our main thesis is that education and wealth cannot protect black mothers from the racial biases and structural racism that exists in science and health.  And we believe that we must educate the general public, so that these trends cannibal Please be more well known and that more people can become engaged in the issue in order to begin to reverse them.

**no speaker (00:48:54.990):** Give.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:49:00.240):**  Yes, why.  This isn't like where's that work.  Okay, I.  pity go back to you for for one of the first slides with a sport.  So, having right those four and what did you eat out anything that invited included and is that, is there any one that's more.  likely to tell us something about this yeah I think it's definitely difficult to include all of the factors, there are a lot of factors that go into all of these.  kind of tried to do a general umbrella of each just because when we talk about the podcast we aim to talk about it for.  A digestible amount so anywhere from two to four minutes for each topic just because we want to bring in.  Topics from pop culture or recent examples, or even from historical historical examples it's kind of hard to do that in such a small amount of time, so.  We just tried to like be very vague with that, but I I think it's difficult to say if one of these more important than the other, because I do ask even said they do work in tandem with each other so accessories I.  mean they're all structural races, they are, but I think the stem from one another.

**no speaker (00:50:20.550):** Okay that's true.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:50:22.620):**  It was a beautiful presentation I enjoy.  Very good.  Environment racism.  We when we were talking about what to do, we did pick that which think that if we delve into that it's going to be a lot as a whole, separate topic in itself.  Because it does affect all of these on top of being an issue itself so um but we might mention it in some in some areas, because it's definitely an issue.

**no speaker (00:50:57.420):** For.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:51:00.480):**  Your podcast.  Do you plan on using words.  Like I like.  I say Oh, we read this paper and it says this.

**no speaker (00:51:14.820):** Is on.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:51:17.250):**  Hold we wanted to make it more of like a podcast that, like any random person would want to click right so like sorry.  So if you listen to a random podcasts and spotify it's just going back and forth right.  There isn't really per se, like a script but the end goal is to provide information with examples from something of the general audience can relate to.  That they can have something to take away from from that show that, yes, I am here, so you guys listen to podcasts I do cleaning her not to do.  Very they're interested just curious if anybody here that knows, one that is not his podcast, but that is focused on campus you guys see that Michael michaels Is that correct wasn't on this, but this is.  This is another topic I just fine podcast to be slightly.  And, but.  It presented data another question just scribble It is these were rather shocking data that i've that when we started looking at.  This semester was shocking to you as well, were they surprised when you started seeing this kind of thing, where it was and stuff that you already know.  And I personally have learned about this before, so I took sociology of healthcare, and these are some of the graphs came from action so.  yeah I also took that course as long as.  i'm interested in the field.  Very good job nice job.  Alright, so we're gonna be doing my project on racial inequities and gender for me care in the United States.  So just as a basic introduction to the current state of affairs and how absolutely horrible it's gotten on gender from healthcare is pretty much under attack and.  Most of the United States, the States passing laws that.  criminalize parents, providing this care to minors character child abusers the of states that are legally restricting access to their piece for youth, which is forcibly D transitioning them, no matter how far along their process.  Their appointing state monitors in schools to confirm students gender in order to compete in sports and then there are also some states that are just flat out prohibiting doctors from performing gender reassignment surgeries.  So my main thesis is focusing on how stigma and discrimination against transgender people of color causes severe mental and physical health inequalities relative to the rest of the population, so.  it's testable and low quality care results in increased risk of adverse health outcomes for gender non conforming individuals.  it's estimated that 31% of all trans people do not have regular access to health care, which cause its own adverse effects and then healthcare professionals themselves.  Usually, are not adequately prepared to provide care to transgender people of color whether that's a familiar with the process or how to treat people who are undergoing over three hormone replacement therapy or who have had.  Other reassignment surgeries and then also transgender individuals are more likely to be uninsured and they're also.  more likely to avoid going to doctors compared to white counterparts and because of this.  They face other inequalities like higher rates of substance abuse and.  If you're a transgender individual you're more likely to be prescribed opiates which leads to further health outcomes.  So main sources are based on the US transgender survey, which was done in 2015 it's a self reported survey of people identify as gender non conforming and United States on a collect data on.  Your access to healthcare your personal socio political and socio economic status as well as your ethnic, racial data.  So this first one is me and comparing access to Jennifer and mental health care amongst different racial and ethnic groups.  The second source looks at statewide policies and how these policies affects quality of life for transgender individuals across the United States, then.  This final and looks at the positive and negative correlations of having affirming care versus not happening for me care and how those affect health outcomes.  So just to go through some interesting maps that I found and sort of to show how these issues all intersect on each other and lead to just a complicated mess of legal and health restrictions for transgender people.  These researchers plotted.  Across the United States different policies and you see for these ones is regarding health insurance, so a lot of the times, health insurance private or public refuses to cover mental health counseling or gender reassignment surgeries.  Then States themselves are passing discrimination policies where you can refuse service or refuse medical care to someone who identifies or appears to identify as transgender and gender non conforming.  And then again states are further administrating gender at a policy level by requiring.  A high barrier of entry to either change the marker on your state ID or change your legal names and issues like this.  affect your everyday quality of life, where a lot of times when you're going through tsa as a transgender person, you were more likely to be screened and we're left with you put on like no fly list because of conflicting data on your ID and your physical appearance.  And then, this is just a real interesting figure from the the one studying access to aftermath of care and discrimination, and you can see that there are positive, positive and negative correlations for.  Both sides of this issue, where you know, access to affirmation.  decreases your risk of ideas, suicidal ideation and increases your access to health care and your overall, general health generally improves along with it.  So the present this i'm going to compile a website that breaks down disparities and mental health physical health insurance coverage, as well as historical legal discrimination.  to sort of explain how these different aspects of life for transgender people of color contribute to their problems with health.  So my goals are to explore the intersecting discrimination based by transgender people of color and how they are disadvantaged and the current healthcare and political system.  And then move on to suggest what personal policy level changes can be made to disrupt the socio political power structure that causes the times.  So I hope this website is going to serve as a resource for healthcare workers, educators and the general public to address their own biases towards transgender people of color.

**no speaker (00:59:50.040):** question.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:59:51.480):**  about the insurance policies.  for having.  it's a law requiring that either private or medicaid.  is covered for.  I.  have to show you some.  it's so take a look at this, this is came yesterday and Karen working.  Karen is a member of our department oh good Melissa can we stop recording.  Can you do that.  Melissa.  I don't I don't have control for doing that.  I don't I didn't start it so i'm not sure I guess.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:01:04.560):**  you're the host trend, so you.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:01:08.160):**  got the recording.  Recording let me go back, let me see.  Maybe here.  that's it okay.  So.  You go guys.  That was that was amazing and.  What do you think Melissa should they have allow those to speak on campus.  You guys don't think so right I don't i'm kind of with you on that one what first of all, what students are we talking about that invited you.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:01:47.910):**  Here I thought it was a Conservative Group.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:01:50.880):**  I was you know, like the young.

**no speaker (01:01:55.380):** yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:01:57.150):**  I mean.  it's one of those things where I kind of think about it in terms of just because you are able to do something, whether you should do it is a different question and I, and I feel like the one thing that really resonated for me with that email is.  Thinking about how it would make other people on your campus feel you know.

**no speaker (01:02:25.560):** Right.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:02:27.780):**  yeah yeah Matthew What did you want it yeah so that you and I had discussions, so that the colonists, there is so bizarre me that he wants to give them a platform to be able to.  express your views, because one thing that resonated to me was I haven't seen something about Q and it is, I think, so one of the Prophet fails on how they just keep.  listing new dates.  On wind like one of items didn't pick that up again and people, just like find this radical it in I think a good.  foundation, like the platform, to be honest, it really does no good, because the people that will buy it if it's there's no convince them, otherwise so environment keep promoting this plan.  Like a mountain he continued How would you handle it, knowing that they were invited on Kansas, I always the best response that we could have been.  approved it's versa, well yeah we'll never find that out right well.  But yeah What do you do now that this guy speaking on campus do was an assignment worked out that was effective should have been something else that have that have been done that should be that I don't know I don't have an answer.  Chris all right, we have Z on and then again to do their thing hey guys.  Talking about Richard disparities and.  So our statement of topic was to basically explore potential factors contributing to visual disparities in the delivery of healthcare and we chose this topic because.  As a research in from across all health related issues with patients have higher rates of morbidity and mortality compared to that have white shoes and especially with the higher belt surveillance of risk factors for hypertension, obesity and diabetes and all of these.  health issues affect such a large population, and so we were wanting to explore the structural issues and weiss's or prejudice that have persisted because.  Such issues still exists in our society today and we chose a podcast for our project format with on three episodes that focus on specific issues that will be talking about a little bit.  So what did the source of St so we chose three sources so i'm just going to like a.  brief explanation your from your side, after that goes into more detail so The first one is about implicit bias and healthcare professionals were excluded.  examine 42 studies that have yeah basically like survey know healthcare professionals and see what kind of biases they had second sources about the wondering hypothesis.  it's the musical we're going to the telling on our side was basically about how the wear and tear of life is actually kind of getting chronic long term biological effects in the body our bodies of.  minorities who go through racial disparities, discrimination and the final sources about algorithmic bias and how massive inflammation of our agora algorithm is terminated risk factors have shown clear discrimination against minority patients.  So going to the first source, the first sources about the 42 peer reviewed articles about the attitudes of healthcare professionals.  So it has to be in these four criteria for it to be considered in the study so First, I have to be an incurable study then have to have a method identifying the inclusive rather than exclusive biases.  And third, is that the participants for physicians and nurses who have completed their studies and then before is that it's written English or other languages that is listed at the low and what they found is that.  Out of the 42 articles that the examiner 27 studies exhibit a racial and ethnic biases for 35 articles found evidence of implicit biases.  And all the studies examine showed that there are correlation between a significant part of the relationship between a level of implicit bias and or quality of care.  So, clearly shows that this study was done in the 2010s I believe so, even now, there is a bias that exists among healthcare professionals, that is clearly showing on a difference in care between the two ethnic groups.  So that's going to be focusing on the weather in offices and in this context wondering.  version of health duty passive aggressive and stresses could include structure individual discrimination environmental hazards.  Housing nations and the wonderful facility was coined by journalists and in an interview for npr she describes it as a general manager for.  Where the django metaphor was very often because you start losing pieces of your health and well being.  But you still try to go on as long as it can but there's a point where enough pieces have been pulled out of you that you can no longer we stand and class, I think that was a very.  impactful because it really encapsulates the effects of socio economic economic structures faced by.  Individuals that just it just proportionately affects health care of the socio economic economically disadvantaged.  And she found that this affected mainly on younger woman and that could also have long lasting impacts on eventual fetal health, and that makes it a lot cross generational issue.  And she also talks about how those who have access to treatment and earlier diagnosis can have longer life expectancies.  And our source that we used for the podcast was a literature review that concluded that 41 studies were in support of the weathering hypothesis as a determinant of racial health racial disparities in health care.  Now final sources about her with the bias, so the study to why we use algorithms and healthcare data.  scientist cyrus sports patients and they assign a lower health risk course to block patients compared to white patients, despite the block patients being considerably more sick.  And this occurred because the honor of place more importance in health care costs, rather than on this so it's very alarming that is already widely used.  And one concern algorithmic bias being mass implement implemented to healthcare, this stack, not only will reflect the biases that the health care professions professionals already have it'll amplify exists for in such massive scary scales, so if it is implemented without any.  Accountability or any screenings in any.  Any any like restrictions and.  If there's none of those are in put in place, then they could potentially have detrimental effects, and that will just continue to amplify the biases that hostile fashion style.  So for our project goals, our main thesis is to say that virtual health disparity is highly complex and each factor that we're focusing on is not mutually exclusive, but all are exacerbated by each other.  interpersonal and structural issues within the system contribute to these racial health inequities and our project is to explain and explore the consequences of some issues.  And for our target audience, because we are choosing to do a podcast we wanted to make it more accessible and more digestible, especially for the general public, and we also wanted to focus on one side to the communities, because of the factors that we chose.  Just to make the podcast more accessible, we also just created a live site.  So this is.  Just like the homepage and that we have just a couple tabs and the purpose.  Below and the tablet just have the episodes and need to get to.  Making the podcast and they'll just be compiled here and that's just to make it a lot more accessible for everyone, because that is our purpose in the project is just to be able to spread awareness about these issues.

**no speaker (01:11:05.430):** And thanks for.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:11:11.490):**  shins.  I think you did a great job because what I really liked about what you've done is you summed up half of the course and you put it together in a website and.  I mean it's just fantastic it's exactly what i'm sure Professor wants you to do, I mean if you got anything to add at this that's just nice nicely put together very good.  Next is their next.  one.  Okay.  Nice projects.  Hello everyone, my name is David reese and my project is that race does not equal house.  i'm just sort of so what i'll be covering is this project will be coming false assumption regarding races correlation to one's health.  In addition, how racist beliefs regarding the genetic difference between people of color and non people of color is embedded into healthcare for furthermore.  We will explore how environmental factors not race that create the disparity that shoes and just sort of the approach connected our introduction This project was a pamphlet format that could be just sort of like easily distributed, whether it's like industry pediatric Center or two.  And the relevance of this project, I took a very personal of instances, as someone of Latino origin of this is a topic that affects me currently and has affected me.  But, mainly because I have believed before taking this course is.  That these false assumptions were or fact.  And that just sort of takes them to the third point that I was also taught this false information growing up i've always heard.  Like any kid I love about junk food, so I just always have heard that just be careful with Latinos were already susceptible to.  You know these kind of like.  hypertension and stuff like that.  So the sources of these other sources extra coverage for, and there are some are some that we have right here in class.  And just kind of my thought process around getting the sources, I wanted to get sources that were kind of easily digestible that could be just read on the go something that doesn't it's not too time consuming but can still.  spark just kind of thought process and just I wanted to just kind of relating the relationship between sources, they all have like facts and they just they have a very statements that kind of explain a lot in a short amount words.  And with that just kind of a rough draft of the pathway, so I really wanted to do this again, this could be distributed wanted to have kind of like a fun facts thing, and this sort of just very brief into the point and.  On the left, you can see that.  Part of it in Spanish, and with that it just.  As a Latino is, I know that Hispanics are predicted to grow more numbers as progressing years and, with that there are people who will.  Not necessarily speak the language or English as a second language, so I want to.  Just I want to be able to adapt to those people, so they can read it, and without having to get a translator so that this information to be spread more effectively.  And for this kind of my thesis is the assumptions about how things relationship to base our bill fundraising ideologies, the reality, all races are genetically similar.  It is the systemic racism that led to the gap in health interest that we see today embedded deep into society, including the medical field minorities and people of color still continue.  to feel the effects to their house every day and just sort of my target audiences the pathway is in that people of color who still believe that the race has unfairly lefton predisposed to medical conditions, and you can also just serve as an educator.  For people that.  Do not identify as a minority or people of color just.  So they can see that these are things that is affecting minorities and people and just.  I really just wanted to be a brief learning tool, not something I can again it's not too time consuming and just kind of just provoke thought and bring light into some of the challenges that is being faced by writers.  And if.  questions.  Now patients and clinicians are.  Well, when i'm kind of aiming is to share with me patience is something that's very easily digestible this clinicians I feel like a lot more information or process, a lot more time is devoted to that have MS patients it's um.  I wouldn't pamphlets are happy out there, usually they should be appreciated lot they're just.  I think I think you're doing something that is extremely important because part of what we're looking at is the the lack of information that is being presented to.  To minority populations, this has got to be better if we got to do a better job, this was a great idea, because if one is where we're actually.  discriminating against people and they don't know they're being discriminated against we're all good and.  Obviously, if you're not speaking English you're not sitting in the class with you worried about this, how do you get that information so it's a step.  And then point will be how do you disseminate that information to these groups and then that should be part of your your project as well because that's incredibly important, and I like how you started to do.  Okay, thank you.  Our.  Alright, everyone i'm not powers, and so my final project is going to be on algorithmic buys perpetuating systemic racism and fields such as healthcare and policing and how generational stars of racism continued to be seen today.  I based on conclusions algorithms draw from historically for data.  So as an overview algorithms with Gray space variables haven't studied to perpetuate disparities across race and reinforce systemic racism, with little to no accountability as developers can hide behind Oh, this is trade secrets era we cannot disclose how we come up with these conclusions.  However, these algorithms include factors that are outside of the individuals control and often have ties to socio economic status, education, employment level of education, consequently, these variables can also vary across racial groups as well.  So it is my intention to synthesize a presentation that includes case studies of individuals that have been afflicted.  Or have had experience negative experiences with algorithmic pisces in these sectors and I intend to analyze the underlying factors and how these search preserve and reinforce systemic racism.  So for healthcare.  This is something we discussed extensively in class as well, so when seeking treatment by patient statistically our assignment lower risks word.  Then equally sick why patients, leading to West black patients being referred to complex care programs than their counterparts.  And so, these bison bison providers on a wide scale serve to reinforce upward bias as Ai interprets these trends as a testing as higher or lower risk.  So the data ends up forming this continuous feedback loop that without intervention from developers or other users it's very hard to dismantle.  So specifically black women have had a lower likelihood of being tested for higher high risk gremlin mutation which are the causative agent responsible for cystic fibrosis in other cancers, despite somewhere mutation risk and it's really hard to justify.  From an API standpoint, why this is the case late, why are we not giving us an equal plane record.  So therefore the cycle would continue and algorithms with a trip at the state, but this data as black Women therefore being over risk and continuing the cycle of malpractice.  So for predictive policing or a specific assessment instruments, these have been used.  and found to compound systemic racism leasing in the criminal justice system, and you know it's it's.  algorithms are fed historical data on to determine where crime is more likely to occur, and even the risk of an individual individual re-offended.  However, these algorithms that provide the scores are built on decades of bias and racist practices and police and therefore it's very hard to argue that these this historical data can be applied to where we are right now in 2022, moreover.  So therefore these algorithms are destined to replicate the the conclusions from the data that they are john on rather than surveys about predictions Everest and moreover.  There is virtually no accountability for developers police or justices that use these practices, but nevertheless they will tremendous I want to say unparalleled influence over and individuals and takeaway just from now.  So, specifically, the one that was given the most attention was the compass risk assessment instrument as it produces a one to 10 risk score of an individual's likelihood to refund.  is directly presented to a judge during pre shot over weeks so bit bail hearings needed sentencing, however, many of the variables.  assessed are factors associated knowledge much, and that would be an overlap with grace as well.  So one of the most interesting things to me with was there was a case that was brought before the Wisconsin Supreme Court, the state versus when, in case in 2016 with the defendant argued that.  The uses of compass risk assessment during their during their trials.  was a violation of their due process, as these conclusions are john on.  associations that have groups that the defendant belongs to so specifically I remember that the case, the Defense was accused of being involved in a shooting just from.  They were using the car later in the day that was originally used by the by the actual perpetrator, however.  They were still given a arbitrarily high risk assessment, risk assessment and they had contended this and went through the appeals court over to the Wisconsin supreme forward.  In which unfortunately they denied that the use of risk assessment instruments even it even as they admitted work can be biased they assess that it was not the only component to their to their trial and therefore you so eligible to be used.  So to tie it all in Bob I attend for to have a Ted talk esque style format of case studies and the presentation may be available for anyone to view as this education in this information should be what more widely known.  But it's particularly relevant to those in tech healthcare in justice fields and is very important to the individuals disproportionate targeted.  So i'll I intend to follow individuals as case studies, such as the state versus loomis case in detail, their experience and analyze trends of bias, even as a whole.  So example patients that are going going to the er to seek care, but do not receive crucial test just from arbitrary algorithmic biases to calculate service scores or for.  The same or similar space where there's rest for an evaluation, but they were given a higher score based off of variables that were beyond their control.  Think it's interesting where you are today for dangerous yes.  that's it's gonna be it's gonna be tough, I mean it's a very scary thing do we have one more present and left that me show.  Alright well we'll be right there, so I think it's great I think it's going to be tough to get a good handle, but I think I think i'm tending to follow more of the individuals and see how they are shorts time so social status, yes.  That will work.  All right, I didn't know much about.  each other.  Okay that's.  Right.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:26:42.150):**  This one's remote.  Yes, ma'am she.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:26:46.440):**  Yes, so he should be able.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:26:49.140):**  Are you there.

**Vamshi (01:26:50.190):**  Yes, yes i'm here.  hi Hello miss Mary Salzburg.  i'm trying to share my screen, please let me know if you look and see that.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:26:59.310):**  I haven't been able to look at the chat is there anything.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:27:02.940):**  No we're okay um he's trying to screen share.

**Vamshi (01:27:08.880):**  With us yes.

**no speaker (01:27:11.100):** looks great.

**Vamshi (01:27:13.680):**  Alright hi my name is one she and my project is about just a second i'm having trouble yeah i'm just trying to my point is about social media bias and its impact on teams, so my brother mainly focuses on.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:27:29.340):**  How to answer.  That let's hear.  Okay.

**Vamshi (01:27:41.610):**  Oh, can you all hear me now.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:27:43.980):**  Better yeah.  yeah sorry for my voice I.

**Vamshi (01:27:49.380):**  Usually heard my voice.  And after really sick today, please bear with me.  Okay, can you all hear me.  Yes, yes, thank you, so my project is on social media and how it's going to affect teenagers and and also possibly the machine learning engineers, how they have to come up.  With a solution in order to mitigate the algorithm buyers so before going into this one, we all know, social medias snapchat Facebook instagram and closing remark quicker.  And the talk so all these social platforms are really hard periods mines, and it can also lead to death and some social racial social and racial discrimination.  So we all have phase, at some point in our teenage life that we think that something we have done stupid and now we think that we, we.  We think that, why did we even do that, so why is it different so we become mature from the teenagers and.  And i'm really interested like how, how is the difference, why do you think like now it's really great and why don't you think when it's done when.  About to john I don't think it's a stupidity so it's all it all goes to the teenager minds, you know the teenager minds it's low and actually what be seeing what they hear and it's a major influence on people's minds.  And so what how social media and racism is connected so social media, as you all know people around the world chairs like lot of ideas and.  moments and organize meetings and everything, so how does social media networks and platforms been involved in.  In division of the communities as most proud racism, such as fake news hate speech and harassment.  So, so we also have on goodbye see you know what is often the buyers, so the alden passes like it's a system it's.  it's an energy produced by a system or a computer like me just answer which is certainly which is are offended by certain people have certain groups.  So it's how how this modern bias racism and social media all these are connected so to get the basic idea i'm just showing an example facial recognition algorithm which works on.  convolution neural network architecture so where we can see here are the image image which is blurred, so this is how a computer recently made a Texan image.  And it takes the features in the binary outputs of zeros and ones, and they purchase the matrix and.  Then, when the image is uploaded when the person images uploading it all takes the features, by giving the dark dark place of the face and lights can disrupt the game face on it extracts the intern individual fees features into a normal rhythm.  So this is a basic architecture is there are mentally like face detection a pain free Syria and there goes to image processing feature extraction and how it goes to.  The origin combined the facial features and how it matches with the library and which is the data that we have we have been given it to the origin, learn and how it.  is giving the conclusion so all this happens in a black box so still a data, scientists and machine learning scorn analyze what happens blackboard blackboard exactly so so they can mitigate this certain issue so i'm.  going to talk about example so social media racism so here on the left side very consider snapchat filter, which is an office folder which has recently.  deleted by snapchat so it was kind of a racist filter where it has shows like Chinese food features and everything it was present for certain.  person for certain group of people, and also in the right side, we can see the second example where uber eats offer this delivery person.  Beyond the on again I have to say is upon was suspended after uber's facial recognition software fail to verify his photo.  So basically when each and every month the delivery guy has to upload his photo in order to get verified so to software doesn't actually.  You know predict the right person, which is the previous person on the same person as well, so this was one of two examples multiple examples for a social media racism.  And so my format is going to be pretty much traditional research paper and my target or our audience would be a general audience many teenagers and possibly mainly at the last it.  It has for scientific community, so how social media or Williams can play huge generation kids and its impact on racial discrimination such engender.  And this is my topic, and what we can see the issues that buyers and how I dream is consequences like privacy intrusions which already have a bias.  So i'm personally interested in this doing this project because it has machine learning algorithms and how do you.  run the algorithms understand what the classifier is are invading the algorithms and eating certain steps so are you input, the data, so this is the major concern for me, so I want to do research like which connects all the racism social media and the.  Origin bias, where machine learning and data science engineers has to understand the.  mentality of the teenagers how they would respond how how how they would react so my suggestion for the machine learning engineers and data scientists wants to do this Oregon architecture strong stuff.  So they have to give a prior survey before they they they want to.  Create build this one rhythm to personally it depends on the target audience whether, if it's like snapchat filters instagram filters many teenagers are more susceptible to this.  For these things, so they need to have survey and also include they also have to include a wide variety of diverse.  Data like like Asians Americans Indians and Chinese and everyone.  who looks different so it has to be a very large data, so my primary sources will be our one research article and mostly are those are the newsletters and blog posts, and this is my project, and thank you, and this is my favorite song by Joe marley Bob marley sorry.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:34:26.550):**  squamish.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:34:29.040):**  that's really cool I have, I have a question about.  So you're you're so sorry the audience you, you want to reach out to his sort of young people how much Are you assuming they have is like a baseline knowledge for your project.  Deep like Are you assuming they're not aware of the harm these things can do Are you assuming they're somewhat aware and you're going to be giving them ideas of how to kind.

**Vamshi (01:34:58.710):**  Of protect themselves, yes i'm giving them the ideas hope I can maybe understand what branch in the organization and how many.  At the last dimension learning engineers and data scientists to understand how teenage minds work and how they can easily get influenced, so my primary audience would be definitely machine learning engineers and scientific community will screen.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:35:23.130):**  Great.  Thank you.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:35:24.960):**  Okay, all right so um Let us just say goodbye to Melissa everybody, and let me just, can I just make a comment, and then you can make your comment, I am always impressed with the.  How much I learned from you.  As students during the Semester and I don't think there's ever been a course where I felt more like that, then this part.  That i've been participating in this you've done you really are adults who are intellectuals, you are capable of changing the world.  And i'm just say thank you and it's really very special so The other thing is that i've always been very, very impressed with Melissa.  I think we're very lucky to have our she's put this together and it's a very special opportunity that we will add to work with her at this so that was nice Thank you all right, you want to say goodbye to everybody.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:36:27.360):**  Oh yeah definitely Thank you all so much for all the enthusiasm and interest you've brought to this.  This semester, it really has been amazing and i'm sorry to cut up and out the way it did, but i'm really glad i've gotten to still be a.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:36:45.990):**  Part of work to play let's see Felix come on.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:36:49.170):**  Okay, everyone.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:36:53.850):**  Your mom's in town right.

**no speaker (01:36:55.500):** yeah. This feeling.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:37:13.560):**  I look forward to reading everyone like seeing everyone's final projects i'm just so excited and you know if anyone ever needs anything from reference letters to someone to talk to i'm always here, so please don't be strangers.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:37:28.290):**  Thank you very much, Melissa we'll see you soon..  Okay bye felicity..  By felicity alright guys.

