---
---

# Discussion

**Date:** 4/19/2022

**Felicity Crawford (00:03:48.120):**  hi amanda how are you.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:03:50.970):**  Hello i'm well how about you.

**Felicity Crawford (00:03:52.980):**  Good thanks.  good to see you.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:03:55.440):**  good to see you too.  um so I was curious Where are you at in DC.

**Felicity Crawford (00:04:02.910):**  Oh i'm actually bucket.  you're not quite yet, but i'm hitting back i'm in the.  In college park I love college backstory.  On 16 just off the 60s, with a little fellow DC on roxanna route in shepherd park.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:04:24.180):**  Oh, see what I have to learn, because i'm going to DC for an internship this summer and I got an apartment in Columbia heights.  So.  I was curious like.

**Felicity Crawford (00:04:35.730):**  Oh.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:04:35.970):**  yeah yeah.

**Felicity Crawford (00:04:37.530):**  My absolutely.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:04:39.810):**  yeah I was, I was excited it was it was tough finding apartments you know because it's so expensive but I didn't want to like be too far outside of the city.

**Felicity Crawford (00:04:49.110):**  Well right.  So when are you moving.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:04:52.860):**  So i'm moving i'm the end of May.  So the week after graduation.  Oh yeah.

**Felicity Crawford (00:05:00.000):**  Like out of your spot.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:05:02.040):**  That for the summer, at least i'm coming back up to.

**Felicity Crawford (00:05:04.890):**  complete my want to leave.  Believing DC.  Oh.

**no speaker (00:05:10.140):** yeah that's good to know.

**Felicity Crawford (00:05:12.630):**  it's a really nice.  city, even the tri state area is really nice.  So i'm like about.  A little 16 or so blocks from the White House.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:05:27.480):**  wow that's so nice.

**Felicity Crawford (00:05:29.880):**  So it's.  it's Northwest DC and you're going to Northwest as well.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:05:35.880):**  uh huh yeah.

**Felicity Crawford (00:05:36.960):**  Oh yeah there's a there's an old city theater there call them I think it's the tivoli.  So you'll enjoy it I think what are you going to be doing there.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:05:51.840):**  i'll be at MAC pack so that's like medicare medicaid and chip environments medicaid and chip advisory and payments it's a mouthful i'm.

**Felicity Crawford (00:06:00.900):**  Just wonderful.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:06:02.010):**  Thank you, and research things yeah i'm looking forward to it.  If you have any recommendations about restaurants or anything to check out like.  I wouldn't highly take that I will make sure I tell you about somebody.

**Felicity Crawford (00:06:14.040):**  Or you go.

**no speaker (00:06:15.660):** Thank you.

**Felicity Crawford (00:06:18.780):**  I see others have joined us hi.  Kemal Athena anya Jesse.  let's versus there Ryan, thank you all for coming in.  we'll give it a couple of minutes before we get started.  I don't know if you know anything about the old Wharf that was sweet.  See in Southwest.  Oh there it's a really nice happening scenes on the water.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:07:02.370):**  After that.

**Felicity Crawford (00:07:04.080):**  restaurant up.  Beautiful.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:07:08.520):**  I am i'm looking forward to it i've heard a lot of good things just about about different things to do.

**Felicity Crawford (00:07:14.790):**  Oh yes, the smithsonian make sure would all of them.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:07:19.140):**  You know.

**Felicity Crawford (00:07:20.820):**  Your tax dollars are paying for it so.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:07:24.540):**  that's what I said I was like you know i'm paying so much to be down there it's a good thing to museums are free.

**Felicity Crawford (00:07:29.970):**  Yes, absolutely.  Make sure you go to them.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:07:33.450):**  Yes, I will.

**Felicity Crawford (00:07:39.750):**  be heading back to Boston shortly.  That sounds good yeah.  So let's see what time is it oh stop 30 we should just go ahead and get started well hi everyone, thank you all for coming again.  I appreciate your being here being on time i'm going to share my screen.

**no speaker (00:08:18.300):** Just.

**Felicity Crawford (00:08:22.590):**  Talking points here.  Tell me if you can see my screen.  thumbs up if you can.  Great.  Thank you Tina.  So let me set it in consent mode.  Alright, so today, of course, we'll start with a dedication.  and  So you on the screen you're seeing three authors.  Two of them Linus Pauling and Robert corey.  won a Nobel Prize for paper that was published by three of them.  And it's a very pivotal paper.  entitled the structure of proteins.  The hydrogen bonded.  Relations of the poly peptide chain.  which in essence.  Parallel the discovery of the Alpha helix 14 structure really pivotal paper it's the principal features of proteins.  So very fundamental discoveries in science Pauline and his assistant corey won the Nobel Prize and I said there were three authors three people who worked on the paper.  What a bird.  Herman Russell Branson was integral to the work of the team was not was not acknowledged.  HR brands and uses mathematical abilities to determine possible the legal structures that would fit both the available X Ray did and the set of chemical restrictions outlined by Pauling after number of months.  Working on the paper.  which really narrow the possible structures to either sees a tighter coil that Paul and turned out for the loser coil.  LUSA helix called gamma.  Branson.  gave him his contribution and went back to Howard, and there was just that single people publish she was simply just missed it it's not.  There, and little did not get any wasn't able to participate in a Nobel prize that was.  That paper that work.  So.  By most accounts many see that.  You know, he was not given is just recognition you happen to also be the Chair of the physics department at Howard University, which, of course, you know, is one of two federally funded universities in the nation that was established by an act of Congress.  So that's our dedication for today.  So here's our agenda in the last class we began to talk about.  Or at least review the path of physiological mechanisms of stress, so that we could begin to understand the relationship between toxic stress inflammation methylation and disease right.  We also took a look at Dr richie michiganders suggestion about how medicine can take a more holistic approach to healthcare.  Today we're going to spend some time trying to address the following question, what will it take to ameliorate the problem of systemic racism in health and science.  and specifically we're going to.  Take a quick look back.  At some.  Scientific racism or we also going to ask cultured science respond to the problem of systemic racism.  Of course we're going to discuss some of the environment, the environmental conditions where people.  have traditionally been marginalized where they live, where they work with it play.  And where they're educated.  we're going to generate some hopefully together some recommendations that you can draw from what you learn before and from some of the readings that you've had throughout the course for us, though.  Because we are structured so that we have some time for you to engage in discussions we're going to start with, that today.  You will work in groups of let's see how many you were here, maybe two groups i'll put you into two groups.  To discuss the readings for about 20 minutes, but I have some slightly different questions that I, I want to ask you, so let me do this if you would go on to.  to your as you're listening to me prepare you if you would go on to your E collaborative notebook here the questions that I have for you and i've sort of created.  two, three or four sets of slides so just so that you would be able to record your names and work on those slides there each group will work on three slides so i've copied two slides one slide twice, and then there is a a short abstract for you to react to.  So the questions that i'm asking on those slides will be.  I want you to think about what functional changes that you understand our company pull up prolonged exposure to stress first to respond.  meetings I have two questions in relation to the readings and in three questions, but are based on your new understandings right, so let me share with you what these are, let me share with you that screen, so that you can see what i'm talking about.

**no speaker (00:14:34.500):** Second.

**Felicity Crawford (00:15:02.250):**  Collaborative notebook pulled up, let me see if I can.  find it fast enough, do you have yours pulled up already your collaborative notebook.  If you have let me know.  And on that note book.  You will find three slides for group.  C and on there, there are five questions and then an abstract for you to react to so i'm trying to pull that up.  so that you can so that I can share with you, while I explain what I wanted to do.  just give me one more second here.

**no speaker (00:16:10.290):** Okay.

**Felicity Crawford (00:16:17.760):**  So.  You should be able to see my notebook now.  And this is where would like to the goal so i'm looking for people to populate this space i'll put the link in the chat again, just in case you can't reach it readily.  Here is the link in chat for the notebook and i'm going to go down to slide 55.  scroll down to slide with define.  me tell you what I wanted to do before two groups.  Okay.  So, on your screen, you should be you should be able to see slide five right now.  There are five questions here first to pertain to the readings, for today and the readings, are you can find them by clicking on the link on the top.  Like what issues or questions are posed by these readings, the second question is what, if anything in the reading surprised you all right, so you will respond to those two questions and then answer the other three the other three are you're.  Pressing you here on your cumulative understanding, so what functional changes accompany for long exposure to toxic stress.  This is based on what we discussed in the last class and will Melissa would have talked to you about and how does racism manifesting.  Temporary science and healthcare institutions, you can make a list and the third one, is what changes would you make in your own professional journey to ameliorate the problem of racism in science and health.  So those are the five questions and because they are five questions I have assigned each group will work with to the slides you can.  copy and delete delete the bottom three questions from the first night and right on the second.  So you have two slides and Mitch, to answer these questions and then the third question is what I would like you to do the third thing i'd like to do is respond to this abstract.  I actually came across this reading from Theresa another member of her team who sent this paper from science, it was just published on the 14th of April.  And it is titled getting ancestry right in science and society, so I just want you to read the abstract, very briefly, and talk with each other and just respond to it Okay, so these five questions and then this abstract.  that's what you're going to work on for the next 30 minutes or so is everybody is everybody on the stage and Bob.  And i'm going to put you into groups and you're going to do your usual discussions, the questions I know are slightly different from what you're used to responding to.  The okay right so okay.  Are there any questions before I put you into groups.  So let me sign you into breakout rooms now.  So, since they're eight of you.  I put you into two groups of four holes that and anybody else who joins.  can feel free to.  enter either one.  So i'm putting into two groups now okay.  amanda and Jesse.

**no speaker (00:21:03.510):** Okay.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (00:26:26.880):**  I wasn't the other group I just had to switch on to my laptop right now.

**Felicity Crawford (00:26:30.240):**  Okay, do you want me to move you back into which.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (00:26:33.930):**  yeah I was in Ryan and athena's group.  Thank you.

**Felicity Crawford (00:26:37.230):**  Okay i'm going to move you then.

**no speaker (00:26:39.810):** begin.

**Felicity Crawford (00:27:11.490):**  Okay, thank you for coming back let's talk about what about some of what you just read I know amanda asked the question earlier, how does the first people but coven connect with racism any thoughts on that.  amanda's did you want to share with your colleagues what you discussed what we discussed.  One of the things will be noted, was the that the long term consequences of coven.  can have significant compounding effects on people who have been disproportionately impacted by covert in the first place.  And since we are removing personal protective equipment, we are, in other words we're not masking or social distancing soon, most of us most people in several states have already abandoned those measures.  People who have had coffee children who have had coughing may have.  Long term.  Long term consequences that that are not as as yet visible too many so that paper identified problems with forgetfulness brain fog depression and the number of other problems that could compound the impact of coven on.  On a segment of the population that is already impacted by other compounding issues.  What are some other thoughts was there anything that was issues related to the readings that you found to be surprising.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:29:36.060):**  I am so sorry before my headphones were not so I can hear you or respond to you.

**Felicity Crawford (00:29:41.640):**  Oh okay.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:29:42.870):**  So yeah i'm sorry about that, but um yeah no the other paper we found interesting to.  You know not not really we talked about it's not really surprising at this point in the course you know about how.  Racism experienced by a mother can impact a child's development, you know we've talked about epigenetics and we've talked about these long lasting.  consequences that racism could have on health, but I think it was still just striking to read that you know something.  Like like racism, could you know experienced by by your mother before you were born could impact your ability and your life expectancy and it's just shows the importance to which.  You know.  You know, like addressing issues like this, you know.  Has.

**Felicity Crawford (00:30:37.980):**  Absolutely.  One would not have thought that that would be a problem today right if your if your mom.  survived and you came.  to life, one would think that if you get the right nurture and you'll be fine, but the residual of the methylation that happens during pregnancy and in your early life as could potentially have a significant impact you're right, it is surprising and worrisome to.  Like your amanda.  Other thoughts.  Anything is people phone surprising.

**Anya Gupta (00:31:22.950):**  I was a bit surprised by the.  coven paper.  Because I mean obviously we've heard about the brain fog symptom.  i'm not faulting anyone, but I thought that we would know a little bit more at this point.  i'm granted it was written like almost a year ago, but it described a lot of the symptoms and I guess locations of the brain, but it really didn't describe in detail, like you know mechanistic details about how these issues are happening so I was just a bit surprised by that.  Like how much is left to be discovered.

**Felicity Crawford (00:31:56.340):**  Right, so we have a long way to go.  What would be your beginning the.  picture that is emerging, is that there are likely long term consequences that we do not yet on this day and.  And so, given that.  I find it worries me at least that we are bonding in abandoning caution abandoning the things that have protected us and children.  in favor of what we see is freedom from disease but that's not necessarily going to be the case right.

**Anya Gupta (00:32:31.380):**  yeah I agree.

**Felicity Crawford (00:32:35.970):**  So I if we were to think about in general, the things that we're beginning to understand about.  The functional changes that accompany prolonged stress, I see people identified already lower cognitive scores for young children, and when it comes to women, the weathering that happens that in in fact could impact child mortality rates, even the mortality rates of pregnant women.  let's see what else did you find as problematic in terms of the functions that are impacted.  See ryan's group identified a number of things, want to tell us about them.

**Ryan Lane (00:33:25.860):**  yeah sure so there's like you know the higher glucose adequate levels and that increases your stress like you know stresses and really bad for like your heart and your blood pressure so that'll lead to some more adverse health effects, then.  You know if you more exposed to such damaging.  Things and then also like you know you're also going to go like more oxidative and epigenetic modification so you're.  Like DNA and jeans itself are going to undergo like you know more damage and more and more stress and like system wide.  impacts.

**Felicity Crawford (00:34:09.510):**  Yes, absolutely so you're drawing a line between chronic stress inflammation.  cortisol.  and disease.  elaine that many still don't see right.

**no speaker (00:34:25.800):** yeah.

**Felicity Crawford (00:34:27.810):**  Yes, thank you.  And what what changes do.  Do you all.  think that you are going to make in your own professional journey to ameliorate the problem of racism in health and science.  it's a big problem where do we start.  Would one would expect that we start, not only by looking at systemic stuff but seeing how we can insert ourselves into the into the effort to make changes right.  So I see in your group Ryan, for example.  Right Athena and Julie, you started to say that really educating yourself about racism and health and science, what else, are you did you discuss.

**Athena Tejada (00:35:24.240):**  Or, I think, like a lot of people going into the medical field should be required to take a course like this, maybe even in Medical School itself.  Because.  I think a lot of doctors are unaware of the fact that a lot of the techniques, we use today we're basically built on like racist acts and discrimination so really being aware of that and then.  doing better, I guess, when you are treating patients and also exposing yourself to communities that you might not necessarily make more money and as a physician but you're actually making a greater impact.  By helping those minority groups.

**Felicity Crawford (00:36:03.840):**  Nobody you're going into medicine.  want to.  Say Does anyone want to save their going into medicine oh.  See that's more than half of you.  That signal significant.  And these, thank you for sharing.  I think.  One of the things that we don't necessarily pay.  Attention to in medicine.  We don't necessarily pay attention to in education and when it comes to the transmission from one generation to the mix, there is a lot that is not yet known, but people are already beginning to study the consequences i'm going to play for you a video.  Of.  scholar at Columbia was trying to look at stress and interesting I mean just like.  Before I play the video, let me tell you a little bit about her, but thank you for so for sharing your thoughts on the readings, I appreciate it.  This this video that you look you're about to look at.  Is have a neurobiologist surname is bianca Jones marlon WHO studies epigenetic inheritance, so the very thing that we're surprised by and thinking about and understand that there's not enough research about.  She researches hold trauma can be passed down from one generation to the next.  So she studies hold a molecular systems of stress in parents might affect the brain structure and sensory experiences of their future offspring.  And she's using rats mice actually not rats to carry out these experiments so she describes these experiments as a proxy for human experience right because doing a traumatic event.  She says that we are still using our senses, to create memories so in one experiment, for example, she created a stressful association with a particular order.  which increase the number of olfactory cells inside the brains of mice then she didn't look to find out whether or not the offspring are born with more than more of these olfactory sales, as a result of their parents trauma.  The studies are still in infancy, but if if what she's trying to prove is the case.  She she thinks that it's an opportunity to potentially even modified it epigenetic switches that might happen for children already early in life in order to reverse them so let's take a look at some of what she is.  researching.  Okay, let me make sure I share my screen, first with you.  Can you see my screen.

**no speaker (00:39:06.450):** Okay, so let me play from current slide.

**Felicity Crawford (00:39:15.210):**  An interesting I think humbling experience yourself reflected in another individual.  they're going to have their own life experiences for you look at them and see yourself in the color of their eyes and their way there knows wrinkles.  I have a two year old daughter.  taking care of my biology by her parents and it's just beautiful that we are set up for success in survival.  And yet, life is dynamic and experienced and sometimes.  What happens when things go wrong, how do we fix that.  I had the amazing opportunity to open a very dynamic.  My biological parents roscoe foster parents.  And so I had the opportunity for as many.  20 some odd.  Years learn to work with.  That we went to bed at heard where my siblings came from and what they had to go through in order to be put in foster care.  There were stories of abuse of not getting the proper nutrition proper care that a child would need.  Young kitchen always have to go through the things they go through, so it almost feels it's my obligation to do something about it, taking my passion for science and what I learned from them and putting them together is really my goal.  My name is bianca don't marlin or researcher at Columbia University and I studied how Tom was passed down through generations.  During my graduate studies, I explored maternal behavior specifically and female mice in the case of the non moms when a pup is removed from it's comfortable and begins to cry we'll leave it there, and that time she'll even cannibal.  However, mom is present in the last, even if it's not the mother of that pub she'll go into a pop up until granted back to.  The goal of our study was to score what was happening in the brain what was responsible for that transition.  When we treated my to have never given birth with oxytocin while above and beyond what the wife's originally what we observed was down when I only saw changes in the way their neurons firing and spoke to each other and hearing Center.  My wife would not ignore the proper cannibalism but go to above and bring them back to the next.  Prior to being a mother, my work and oxytocin still was so close to my heart, knowing that my siblings had parents who couldn't be the best moms and dads and why could that be, what is a quote unquote bad or good parents and how can we aid process.  My work now focuses on stressors that seemingly can't escape how stress can affect not just an individual, but subsequent generations.  All of the cells in the body have what we call epigenetic regulation, which means the cells know what they shouldn't shouldn't be.  But certain experiences, the environment can change what genes are expressed not expressed as DNA actually is just the recipe, but it doesn't make the cake.  markers around the DNA say you can't touch this piece or now you have access to the cna you become a protein, so our genes don't change, but the things around our genes that make our genes work or not can change to adapt to the environment.  So, at the end of World War Two and experience public hunger winter occurred and during this time, people in the Netherlands will start the food.  Their children and their grandchildren or observed to suffer from increased rates of metabolic issues, for example, diabetes, high blood pressure and even schizophrenia.  It wasn't just children that were conceived during the famine for children that were conceived afterwards as if.  The sex sells the sperm cells and the cells had a memory of that Tom about stress well beyond the years of famine.  It really did spark questions in the scientific community of how can a memory, a message live on sperm and egg and how is it being passed down so that's an example of transgenerational epigenetic in part.  There have been a lot of questions surrounding epigenetics transgenerational epigenetics and that's because we're studying humans.  A lot of this has to do with what we are reporting and our experiences with life and so it's really hard to get pristine clean data from history and experience.  When it comes to mice we can take my them in a controlled environment where the only thing that should be different is experienced that they're having.  My angle, as a scientist is to make things better, and in this case is how to make a bad experience less traumatizing and dramatic for the organism and for subsequent generations.  And in order to make things better, we first have to figure out what happens when things go wrong.  And so what if we made a stressful situation with mice has it changed the way their brain respond this question started our experiments that we're doing now.  They rely on small very heavily their own sense on a small company to their nose, like the smell of almonds and they begin to fire and they'll tell other neurons in the brain that this is the smell of.  Until we do is, we have the almond paired with shot.  After the experience now starts to avoid that smell, we then go and look at the actual brain and the cells in the nose actually respond to chemicals in the air.  structure of the cells are still there they're still present, but we can see through the bone and we can see through the fast and and look at just the felt.  From there we put this tissue on something called a light key Microsoft able to look at the whole tissue able to have a 3D rendering of the nose and our beautiful image of the actual cells in the notice.  Everything that's in green here are cells that response on, and these are the first off let's say I smell something and send that message to the brain we go through me count how many cells in the tissue.  So in the parents after about a month you start to see an increase in these cells that response, the Ombudsman.  And this word that we're calling upon former lives have shown you were looking at the mechanisms hi man what's really exciting, is that the pups teams already be born more cells that respond to omit.  Because no mice are constantly creating this means that the experience it's not just living in the sperm that's present some house living somewhere in the body and forming this firm to make sure that all subsequent generations are getting this message.  smells like ever meeting their offspring having their sperm passed on to the second generation those offspring altered brains, because of the experience of their father went through.  So it's a beautiful situation in which biology is preparing us for an environment that may or may not be there and I think that's where the problem lies, is the smell and elicit a response that it shouldn't elicit because there's no actual stressor there.  But this is a proxy to the human experience, because during a traumatic event, we are still using our senses, to create those memories and what we're exploring these memories are actually then passed down to the subsequent generation, and what that would look like biologically.  We look at our data it's a little bit nerve wracking because I go back and I think about how an experience I could have can be passed on, and not just an experience that I have but that my husband experiencing could have had well before he met me.  For so long and that could affect our office we don't know that's the exciting and terrifying part and needs to be answered.  me personally being black American knowing that my ancestors went through a trauma for generations and generations, if my words can inform any aspect of the opportunity to live safe happy just life.  And i'm happy with the direction in which my work has been.  So.  Before you watch this video I asked you to respond to an abstract, which is a paper that was published.  was published in science on April 14 and, if I may, read just a little bit to bring out this party's over reinvigorated debate about the relevance of race to help, including hydration should and should not be used as a variable to research and biomedicine given what you just heard.  What are your thoughts about using ancestry categories as as.  We as a biological variable.  Or, as the only one.  Given.  What you just saw and.  The possibility that one's experience can modify your genetic expression.  for generations.  Yes, Jesse.

**Jessie Hsu (00:48:54.600):**  I guess, given what was in the video there's definitely some potential merit in taking into account ancestry given how it can affect things like the epigenetics of a patient.  But when.  My group was talking about it we're also very worried about like, especially in the last sentence of the abstract, how it says that.  If we just rely on ancestry categories and population categories it's very possible that this that this will end up just searching like.  This will just end up acting as a proxy for race so it'll essentially just replace race and not really fix the problem at all, since it will just be re capitulating it.  And we won't be able to.  Basically escape the structure of race, this, especially given that in the lewington paper were looking at earlier in this class, there was the.  notion that there are more genetic differences across within a population than across population that doesn't exactly make sense, how using population categories as our main genetic like.  feature we're looking at would really fix things so we're talking about how it might be better if we're talking about genetics, to look at more personalized medicine.  or potentially to.  Again focus more on the social factors at play instead of using genetics, as the sole thing we're looking at.

**Felicity Crawford (00:50:26.850):**  it's inescapable that that our experiences.  would have impact on what is seen as a Community.  In people's disease states and so on, so yes person personalized medicine that takes a holistic view of a person's health history and so on, sounds to be more appropriate and I agree with you, I your worry resonates with me as well that it might become a proxy.  For a short explanation or missing all the other things that we know to be problematic if we were to only take on so called does have merit has some limitations of an intro thanks for sharing.  and  So when we think about when we think about this need to look holistically.  At the problem.  It requires us to do.  To be constantly thinking about and remembering all the history of science in justifying races ideas, as well as thinking about all these ideas of shaped.  hole some.  Were miss represented on this treated by sizes.  So, scientists have spent a lot of generations using science to substantiate the explanations to justify the hierarchy of reasons right.  You may not have seen this video before, but I know, Melissa talked with you about the ways in which caused that Scott size was measured, the beginning of the Semester.  And she did mention morton who in 1839 published what is arguably the most expensive or most famous collection of schools all over the world is collections in Pennsylvania label you publish the book.  which at the time was used quite heavily to justify his ideas so his book the victim semi illustrations of native Americans and he did ask lots of all over the world, by the way.  But this book depicted illustration 78 illustrations of native Americans from North and South America, who died in fights to defend their whole man, so these skulls were in some cases dug up somewhere hunted and sense.  sent by.  surgeons and so on to morton and he made the proposal that their minds appear to be different than that of the white man without really.  Providing the evidence to support that assertion so his thinking was influenced by practice of phonology, which is the most abundant been studying, that is the shape of the skull to the terminal personality traits and not the theory of heritage.  Ahead heron heron.  A retiree nerium as a retiree rated larian.  Which is a school of thought that's all heredity but playing a major role in determining treats such as intelligence and personality.  Sorry, I was hereditary aneurysm and quality journalism school of thought that saw human races as created separately and on equal this video which I invite you to look at.  really does.  give you a sense of that history i'll just play a few minutes of it okay.  If native American skull was collected from the battlefields of the second seminole war in the mid 1830s.  The neat bullet hole provides the last thing reminder of what's happened to those in order to defend their homeland in 19th century Florida.  This is just one of 78 illustrations of native North and South American skulls featured in Samuel George morton's cranium Americana published in Philadelphia in 1839 is undoubtedly the most important book in the history of scientific racism.  The 19th century was a period in which science with increasingly used to justify racist ideas.  In a claim typical of these developing Rachel Simon is morton voted Native Americans that the structure of his mind appears to be different from that at the white man.  The idea that Native Americans could not integrated.  Okay, so you get the idea that these three theories.  Have, although they have long been abandoned the idea of inferiority has moved on throughout the centuries really and has had significant impact on policies law.  medicine and other fields right.  So, for example, I mentioned to you in the last class before we ended the two top science journals acknowledged as problem one apologize, and on the other one said you don't really have to take a holistic view of.  of how science came to be the leaders and to do something about it.  So, looking back you know that scientific experiments were done and blacks without anesthesia observational studies were carried over the last century, the testing for advocacy for drugs on specific diseases like penicillin and the novel the tuskegee experiment.  And the list of atrocities is really known.  But, in some ways.  As this long Dooley that can get back all the way through slavery.  The harmful impact process and really have to think about how as higher ED institutions and as people who are heading into various medical fields on these problems persists so several institutions like Harvard, for example, and MIT have started to respond.  And MIT for example of this project going with how we, I can impact structural racism and I know Adam talk to you about trying to use firor more fear approaches and that there's a problem with even the way we we find fairness to to make the the process of.  The kind of data that you collect.  For.  for building an algorithm to ensure that there's not any bias built in from the start that requires a lot of.  A lot of.  Thought to be put into the kind of data that we are massing to do that so several universities in higher education, for example, have responded and.  MIT has done some work.  But the the ways in which universities have responded Some would argue, have been inadequate to date.  So Harvard, for example, created a new initiative at black college to address.  The enduring legacy of racism, but they have not done much beyond looking at.  legacy without thinking about the ways in which assists in contemporary society so some created a web site some created a history course and some media report, but the problem is that.  The consequences live with people live in the same spaces, where people work live and are educated and continue to have impact on generational intergenerational impact.  So, and others are saying you know we really need to consider all the history of exploitation show up not only in people's physical health, but in the laws and in the.  employment systems and, in so many systems that makes for a very confounding experience for those who are experiencing it so what I want to do is to give you a quick sense.  of how, if we look at all those social determinants of health, the the multiplicity of ways in which these things show up so, for example.  blacks were enslaved or forced to work in Bhutto conditions during the enslavement period it worked in agricultural domestic and settings and a service workers right.  So they cooked and clean and then.  What happens and you name it the exploitation began in those years and persisted in the two years and economic exploitation and.  divisional segregation so into the reconstruction and Jim crow era, many scholars would see that that you find strains of this sort of exploitation continuing.  While in the days of slavery, what the slaveholders netted was about $14 trillion in today's money, but even when it ended folks who lost their property got compensated, and those who were enslaved we're not in fact they were subjected to.  Quite a brutal system of economic exploitation and occupational segregation so, for example, and there were some.  unstated but expected ways of treating black folk that people lived up to, so there was something called the Black codes, but that really reflected the.  The practice of fighting people as they work if they worked in any other occupation, besides the ones I just described a service as farmers and so on, if they were caught in any other.  profession, they actually had to work for free on.  On the white plantation, and this is after slavery ended, and that was because of a loophole in the 13th amendment.  That really forced them to work as on paid laborers so when you think about that history long after slavery ended it didn't end.  And so, for many, the the historical trauma that began we persisted even through that time and if you were to take a look into the fact that, at the same time of reconstruction, they were lots of folks were lynched for a number of reasons.  And many would argue that that lynching in some ways in present day, America is evident today, even as recent as what we saw happen with George floyd.  So.  And here's some other example.  Of.  Of what that looks like so in 1938 from 31 to 39 right when we had the Then there was the.  Great Depression in the US Franklin D Roosevelt came up with a set of.  programs public work prod projects and financial reforms and regulations which we call the package and called the New Deal these programs were included.  As new constraints and safeguards and the banking industry, and it was an effort to re inflate the economy after the depression right.  So problems included laws that were passed by Congress, and of course executive orders that the President fast so here is a year, a couple of those laws in 1935 and 38.  A number of laws were passed the fair Labor standards Act and the national Labor Relations Act, these were too dramatic.  laws that, provided that dramatically improve the working conditions for millions of white workers in the US and move many people into the middle class.  The fair Labor standards act, for example, while it boss boasted bolstered out working conditions of millions of whites it also introduce the 40 hour work week that's where that came from.  We ban child Labor before that young children were expected to work right alongside adults.  We established a federal minimum wage and overtime requirements all of those things improve the working conditions and move people into the middle class, yes, it was excluded from that that.  Anybody who worked in domestic agricultural or service occupations, this is where many blacks were relegated to in the reconstruction era and onwards and many continued working in those sectors.  Even in 2021 would you believe it many agricultural workers are still denied access to overtime and minimum wages, so that people who come from Mexico pick strawberries, and whatever fruit and vegetables, we have they get.  Many that do not get the same protection so children as young as 12 year olds individuals can still work on those fields to be in the US.  Without being sanctioned.  So the national relations are.  Also, known as the Wagner expanding collective bargaining rights nationwide we had the growth of unions that gained higher wages for their workers, we had improved benefits.  Job security better working conditions.  And many moves into the middle classes, I said earlier, but this act also excluded domestic and agricultural workers who are disproportionately again people of color.  They remained excluded from the white man and from those protections.  These laws also continue to have negative impact on their wages so think about this in 2021.  there's a segment of the population.  That does not get the updated minimum wage for our.  surface occupations, with high percentage of black work is included baggage porters bell hops concierge is barbers taxi drivers.  The median wage is still $12 and 99 cents and you know the minimum wage went up recently and, in many cases have been as high as $18 for some right.  But these particular workers are excluded from that means housekeepers cleaners sewing machine operators, they get $11 and $12 and so on, consistently, this is in 2021.  When it comes to.  Some other discriminatory laws they shop in several States as the right to work, laws in several states that undermine and stymie work as ability to advocate for themselves through unionization and to chief economic party.  Luckily recently Amazon workers in one state got the opportunity to unionize, but that is not the same, the same is not true true across borders and an overwhelming number of these workers are people of color so that has an impact on their economic stability right.  So employers with relatively few employees are continuing to discriminate with very little culpability.  So there are agencies that are set up to you know, help us to live up to the expectations that we have as a society.  And so they're anti discrimination or enforcement agencies, like the eeoc, but they are hamstrung because they're underfunded.  And they're limited in scope by what they can do so, the you'll see, for example, is charged with enforcing federal laws to make it illegal.  to discriminate against job applicants and employees, based on race color religion, sex national origin, so on but between 193 1990 and 2018, for example, the US population grew by four to 4%, which is what turn 27 million people right to 327.  But there's no significant increase in the inflation adjustment budget for ios so they have a significant backlog of more than 50,000 charges against people, so they can keep up with the problems.  And so it continues.  When we think about why the social determinants of health.  is important.  We have to remember that historically ratio capitalism catapulted this economy.  which then needed people needed a justification for the exploitation that on which that system was built, so the scientific literature.  Provided that it was sustained in law, and we can begin to see how it has created a modern world system of continual subjugation for many.  Adam would have mentioned to you a number of weeks ago that the social determinants of health are the conditions in the environment, where people are born, where they live, where they learn where they'll work, please worship and he age and.  And they have in these systems a wide range of health.  issues and the quality of life, differs depending on who we're talking about, so there are five domains that.  we're going to pay attention to for short bit economic stability, education, access instability helped here.  And neighborhood and the built environment and the social and Community context remember rishi manchanda whose video you saw last time, who took on.  A holistic approach to medicine, where he just was lonely looking at.  The disease state, as reported as you are generally expect in a doctor's office, but he thought about the broader societal societal context within which these people came from, and try to think about the other factors that are impacting his patients, health.  So social determinants are really important to pay attention to and public health scholars and increasingly those in medicine, so you cannot do anything to.  ameliorate the problems that people are facing or even address the disease issues that you're seeing if you don't take into consideration these.  These issues, so it is necessary to pay attention to social determinants I have because you can't solve one problem without solving all of the problems right.  So this is the maximum that a lot of social services are taking on, and rightly so in medicine as well, the same principle has to be applied across a number of solutions and if we're going to make any change.  So in thinking about in thinking about your patient or if you're working in the health sector sector if you're planning on working in education.  You have to have a be open to understanding these broader complexities, because for them if there's any one person of color navigating that context they're impacted by economic issues they're impacted by income issue because they're impacted by.  Costs the wealth that they can accumulate the savings their employment.  issues as well, and you know everything hinges on everything hinges on their ability to pee so their housing is also part of part of an issue.  And so, when you think about economic instability income levels among.  Among folks of color really lead them to relatively poor house in quality unstable neighborhoods overcrowding and so on.  And when it comes to income and security of course employment provides individuals with income right, and if you don't have a high enough level of income, especially in this inflationary environment, then we have problems in 2021 black women.  The unemployment rate for black women, and this is an independent mimic was 9.9%.  For Latinos it was 6.7% for white women it's it was 5% in 2021 those numbers have gone down significantly, but the current employment, unemployment rate for blacks is still we hire.  hovering around 5% as opposed to the three point or 2% as it is for everyone else, so the cost of the economy is great the wealth gap.  Which is drained an average of a trillion dollars from the economy ish each year continues to be a problem it's costing every American about 20 $800.  So it's not a small number.  And, of course, our health costs are soaring because of all the.  multiplying challenges to help.  Employers are selecting and overlooking job applicants, based on their names that is happening with greater.  With greater frequency because of job sites like indeed and so on, that use algorithms to select potential applicants, so any applicant with a black sounding name gets automatically.  eliminated.  algorithmic bias and just so since we're talking about algorithmic bias is also impacting how teachers evaluated, for example.  So when it comes to.  housing and security access the fear mortgages algorithmic bias algorithm algorithms determine who gets money, who gets who was able to secure a mortgage.  For purchasing a House so fear more mortgage products is crucial to families ability to become Homeowners and if we have algorithms that exclude people from the outset.  And as Adam would tell us that the algorithm itself it's the input of data, what you put in, is what you're going to get out and sort of problem lies at the data input level.  So there's always an insecurity.  Their legacy models or traditional credit score models that exclude many from home ownership, because those models do not assess consistent gig work we're working.  You know the type of gig gigs that you have temporary short term.  That wouldn't get to a house if you're self employed it's a harder challenge to buy a house with that history if you don't have a history of timely payments.  So there are a whole lot of variables that add up to your credit worthiness, which is what these algorithms take a look at in order to get you eligible for.  A mortgage these models work to support of the exclude a fair number of people of color from accessing credit and therefore from getting cold.  So this legacy credit assessment disproportionately impacts, a whole number of undeserved deserve.  undeserving people, people were viewed as on the surfing.  And there are number of markets that have been excluded, so if you live in a certain neighborhood in a certain zip Code, the number of mortgages that are awarded in that area very different from others, so the system has an inherent flaw.  a limited number of data points.  To.  systems that fever.  Others, who have the capability to borrow more and to get access to credit.  And then, on the other side there's a lack of affordable housing, so they are more low income renters especially renters with extremely low incomes, they find housing on the open market to be a struggle.  and on available.  And then, of course, when compared with similar homes, people who are able to buy.  An access forms with other amenities African Americans are usually undervalued by 23% which translates to about 150 $6 billion in lost equity across an entire racial group so i'm painting this picture that shows you the different levels or layers of stress across a number of.  systems.  Coupled with all that the housing the credit access lack of access to credit and so on there's also food insecurity.  food insecurity really is a lack of consistent access to enough food for an active deliver an active, healthy life and many people are experiencing that today.  Although hunger insecure and food insecurity or related it's not the same thing Hong Kong refers to personal physical sensation in this comfort.  What i'm talking about is food insecurity, which refers to the lack of available financial resources for sufficient food at any at the household level.  So there are lots of homeschoolers many of them with children that are headed by single women, many of whom are women of color living alone living with children they have a higher number and a higher percentage of food and security.  There are lots of homeschoolers that live below the poverty line by at least 185% they are experiencing food insecurity and as if that weren't enough that as if that were not enough for the.  200,000 children are so who lost both parents were now in the welfare system.  The child welfare system and i'm talking about parents children who lost their parents during the corporate environment COP on top of all the others who.  have been in the child welfare system for a long time, many of them are also children of color this child welfare system, which is designed to be a safety net.  of social services for children is not functioning as such, many identify it as a policing system that operates with its own type of policing agents investigators punitive courts parole and probation officers.  Every single aspect of the child welfare system as a procedural analog in the criminal justice system.  So.  poor black native American children are exposed to significant harms in in that system there's a lot of surveillance.  Which is used as the primary ways to address the needs of marginalized group.  And, of course, their forcible separations most removals it interestingly enough, even though we think that.  it's only children, who are our friend that end up in the child welfare system that's not necessarily the case at all most removals.  and motivated by chase charges of neglect and what are they describing as neglect not having enough food or not are being home alone so child could be taken away for food insecurity.  And you're only in that position, because you have problems with economic or employment instability.  And, and the ways in which the adults or within that system are treated anything is as if.  The system is saving your child from the word in fact.  The opposite is true, so you see that in the system there's pervasive inequality.  Which by inequality dnn to find those on even or unjust distribution of resources and it could be in income, it could be in wealth.  And all of the material social, educational benefits that come from these right so, for example, we think about the pervasive in called inequality in the US.  Between in 2020 between four to 1,000,000,000,050 trillion dollars in wealth has been transferred from the bottom 90% of Americans to the top 1%.  So the Federal Reserve estimated that the bottom 50% collected and controlled only $2.6 trillion, so the bottom 50% $2.6 trillion is all the control.  Which is 16 times less than those in the top 1% the top 1% consists of about a couple thousand people, so this massive transfer wealth has continued.  And exacerbated in the Corbett pandemic So what we have is a country of very, very rich people.  And a federal government that doesn't have the social systems to ensure that everybody has a fear and just access to opportunity and so on.  So many inequalities have been observed to the are actually observed as gaps in wealth gaps of income gaps in education gaps in achievement, and we can go on right.  But these gaps come as a result of all the inequities and the and the very different ways that we think about people, about in terms of gender in terms of race, in terms of ethnicity, sexual orientation and so on, that the list goes on.  And it hinders our economic or very stability as a nation you can't have that level of an inequity exist without without consequences.  So the thing is many in the inequalities of because they observed as gaps and because the gaps come from inequities.  disadvantaged people over there, played not too personal inadequacy or economical accident, but the concern to really to conscious policies.  That exclude them from fear and just opportunity to begin with and i'm going to talk a little bit both schools, because schools are sites of social reproduction, we all have to come to that system right.  But, and so on one hand it.  Is reproducing and exacerbating these inequities but it's also a place that we can begin to at least in that space from as early as children as when children into school to mitigate the problem.  But that is not happening because as educators, we don't have a large enough understanding of the systemic issues, no one profession.  Has that on the standing and every one who's concerned with the problem of inequity.  in different ways are seeing you know what if you're going to solve this problem, we really have to take a look at how these problems exist, the money so Come on, over time, so that the weight of the problems in every sector can really render somebody.  physically dead or seriously incapacitated.  So that.  comes from minority children are much more of a function of their own equal access to educational resources.  All right, i'm looking at the time and i'm seeing that as to 10 Oh, my goodness time flies in this class.  So i'm going to take my cue from you should I continue, or should I give you a five minute break.  five minute break.  Anyone.

**Anya Gupta (01:27:11.550):**  We usually end like at 215 ish.

**Felicity Crawford (01:27:16.110):**  Okay, so, then I have less than less.  Okay alright so.  Let me just tell you a little more than that to go over that.  When I think about what's happening in Greece in education.  Black students.  Experienced racism at an early age it starts early really early in preschool and it continues until.  You know post secondary education, when it comes to young children, young girls.  Young black girls, for example, the they're faced with gender and gender bias and racism.  There thought of as being.  more mature, more sexually aware and in need of less protection.  So there's this adult education that happens, and when that happens, they get punished more.  They end up in the social justice system criminal justice system at early ages.  And so.  Just racism is not the only problem gender violence and gender bias is also problematic is not only that young black girls face it.  To them, or black queer trans indigenous spore and them binary they are to experience.  violence, sexual violence sort of problems compound.  And, and then on top of all of that we have people who are structured student depth in education they're not a lot of students in science, but when they show up, they have to pay way more, and they are struggling a lot more.  And then we have his explanation that we offer that says, you know there's a limited number of blacks and science only because they're not enough qualified people.  And that only 50 what the problem is that only 50% of our high schools offer the kinds of subjects that prepare you for science 50% of calculus.  3% off for physics and in high poverty, schools, my goodness, between 10 and 25% the highest.  Levels forces so we cut off the number of students who can get into science in the first place, which impoverishes in universities at all levels.  So this lack of access to science, education is a big problem for kids of color fewer than fewer than half of them are ending up in in.  In math and science courses in high school and then again in college right, so the problem is significant and an economist said, you know what.  This these all these gaps that you're seeing gaps in opportunity refers to the arbitrary circumstances in which people are born, such as race, ethnicity and support and he's been able to see that.  Our socio economic status determine the opportunities in life, rather than all the other things that we are, we are facing, so this problem.  Because it exists across so many different sectors and because we have set up the system of all we award people with mortgages and and how we fund schools, all of these negative impacts have a basis in where we live.  and  And when we think about medicine, for example, we have a crisis in medicare because, even though we have the universal about tier.  More people of color are more likely to fall into a coverage gap, because they earn too much to qualify for medicaid.  and not enough to be eligible for premium tax credits and on the marketplace plans, so this spills over into an equitable outcomes black women pregnant black women by at much greater risks of than others, and so the cycle continues so it's not just that.  You have a disease to think about and then that's it, you have to think about all those complex.  environmental circumstances that have significant impact on people's hard outcomes and then, when you're in college and in universities, people are in in or various professions, we have this idea that you know it's hard to find a qualified black candidate, but does not happen by.  This hard to find black candidate is actually an excuse, more than anything else, because if we understood the systems that we understand that there are a whole lot of foundational fallacies that are.  driving this narrative so the notion that is a single most qualified candidate or employees falls and and that's a very highly subjective idea, the idea that people are so that that success is associated with talk with see.  The sushi coaching in organization language of the cultural or expressing this desire for the candidates and employees to have some sort of similarities beyond the qualified.  The qualifications that are expected.  And another fallacy is that is a common belief, with many black workers that need to be twice as good in order to get in when you think about the recent justice.  The the approval of the recent justice that shows up as a problem for many.  So really when you think about the kinds of recommendations that we would ask you to consider think about the circumstances and think about how you would confront and addressing equity medication or inequity in all of these systems.  As you consider your own professional path a clinical psychologist would tell us that becoming a transformative holistic and empowering them adaptive and reflective system is what is needed it's not that in place but that's what's needed.  and others would see you know, we need to be more collaborative a multidisciplinary approach is important and a position of advocacy is also important, I asked you as you think about as you think about how you're willing to.  Fight no projects and, as you think about your own professional path what should it look like, for you, what would you do differently, how do you assert.  What what you know understand about the inequities and the resulting in equality in your various professional endeavors home, would you assert yourself in that's in that setting What would you do about it think about it, as you think about your final projects right.  So let's let's.  Looking forward to reading your final documents, and thank you for coming today.

**Anya Gupta (01:34:43.650):**  Thank you.

**no speaker (01:34:45.060):** All right.

