---
---

# Discussion - Davenport

**Date:** 1/27/2022

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:02.370):**  Alright, so welcome everyone today i'm glad this is going to be sort of our last remote session starting next week will be over in brb 115 for the lectures and the discussions.  So everything will also be available on zoom will just be meeting in person for those that are coming back.  So before we get started with.  Does anyone have any questions related to the assignment or logistics or anything like that.

**no speaker (00:00:44.430):** Okay.

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:47.160):**  Good okay well, if anything, comes to mind, please feel free to put it in the chat and I can address it for you or you know if it applies to the whole class for the class.  I saw it through perusal that everybody has been doing lots and lots of annotations and that's been wonderful to see so i'm really excited that you're going to get to talk about that together today.  So let's see so I just wanted to.  follow up about so at the beginning of class last week we talked about having these general sort of classroom ground rules for our discussions he's applied both to these days, where we're going to talk about things in the group.  And sort of our common sense things about listening to one another participating as best we can, and you know.  being willing to acknowledge that, even though everyone may have good intentions, at times, there can be an impact of saying something.  That hurts another person, these are these are things that can sometimes be very difficult to talk about and uncomfortable.  So.  If you had any additional ground rules that you wanted to consider for things, please let me know.  But.  This is what we have is the framework at the moment.

**no speaker (00:02:21.450):** is to keep in mind for today.

**Melisa Osborne (00:02:27.090):**  And so.  Alright, so what's the plan for today, well, the first, the first thing we're going to do is dedication.  So today's dedication, is to zora neale hurston now Why did I pick sore know Kirsten well the readings that we focus on today, like the davenport reading.  And the castle reading are writing that were done by prominent biologists genesis and contain a lot of biases that we associate the three sites, so I want to spotlight zora neale hurston because she was a woman of color that was contemporary to that time.  So she studied anthropology with Franz Boas who's actually a really cool dude in his own right we'll talk about him later on.  He taught at Barnard, and she studied with him there, and she was a guggenheim fellow that study practices in West Indian.  So obey a practices or.

**no speaker (00:03:32.190):** practices.

**Melisa Osborne (00:03:34.590):**  And she was a prolific writer.

**Felicity Crawford (00:03:36.630):**  She collaborated with langston.

**no speaker (00:03:38.250):** Hughes and other contemporaries.

**Melisa Osborne (00:03:41.430):**  And oddly enough, she was kind of not really very well known as a figure, she was buried in unmarked grave that got a lot of attention because it was rediscovered by the writer Alice Alice Walker..  Much leader, and so I really enjoyed this..  quote from her..  I have the nerve to walk my own way, however hard I search for reality rather than climb upon the rattling wagon of wishful illusions..  So yeah so that's today's dedication, is to zora neale hurston..  homework..  Alright So what are we doing..  So this is the plan so for the first part of class two from now to probably around 120 and the idea is that we're going to get into small groups and discuss the general reading, so the chapters from superior, which I have around here somewhere..  At for this part of things we're going to be taking advantage of..  A group notebook that we're going to have in Google for the Semester so here, let me share the link in the zoom..  So the link for the group notebook is here, and the idea is that you know every..  Every week for Class we have kind of like two sets of readings, we kind of have background readings and and like a general set of reading..  Then we have the more specific readings that you're going to be assigned for annotating, and so I don't want the general readings, to go by the wayside..  I want to visit those things, and so the idea is so this is sort of, can you tell me that i'm a research scientist, so the purpose of things is to..  discuss the general readings, which are listed here and so these are sort of starting questions that i'd like you to consider for this part of the discussion in your small groups so like what questions were posed by the author of superior Chapter one and Chapter eight..  So kind of like what was the main thesis of each chapter or idea and what example stuck out to you that they used to support that thesis..  Because there's lots of examples, so it would be possible to probably focus on all of them, but I think each person in your group, probably would bring a unique example that stuck out to them..  And then, what i'd like you to think about is what, if anything, of the in these first couple of chapters, you know, was a surprise to you..  And then, what scientific concepts actually if any..  were needed to kind of understand what was going on in the text, and then the last thing is to this reading this general reading lead you to make additional connections with your own experience or current events, and this is more of..  Something that is a more personal question..  So know if you're comfortable sharing that's great if it's just something you want to ponder on your own that's also fine..  And so the directions are i'd like you to all consider and talk about these in the individual groups you're going again..  And you'll have about half an hour to discuss things and i'll probably give you about five minutes to get settled and then i'll kind of move it and..  i'll say hi to each group and make sure everyone's good and like if you have any specific questions for me i'll be available to you to to ask those and..  Then i'd like you to use this notebook space here..  To record your groups thoughts and ideas that we're going to do this every week so that are the evolution of our reading and our ideas from the Semester is in like sort of..  One place together, you can kind of chart our journey as a class, and so I Bade..  I was really walking out I made some example possible changes your group could use for format, you can use anything you want, but these were just like a couple ideas, if you wanted to jot things down in boxes, or, if you like, lists or, if you like, tables tables so..  But you can do whatever and add as many pages, or as few pages to that artwork whatever This is very free free flowing So this is the first part..  of our session today..  And then the second so once we get done with that i'm going to take a small break..  And then we're going to move on to talking about the hashtags and the annotation specifically and so, for this we're going to use the jam board platform talk about that, when we get to this part of things, some more and will kind of share our thoughts on analyzing the actual specific..  yeah so that is the plan general discussion is where we'll start up..  Okay, so..  going to pause reporting I don't report.

