---
---

# Sources and Types of Stress/Biological Effects of Chronic Stress

**Date:** 3/24/2022

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:04.710):**  now see if you can join.

**wasserman (00:00:11.730):**  Okay.  Thank you, sorry that that.

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:16.500):**  don't be i'd hate to miss this part.  All right, guys I can't I can't wait for the dedication.

**wasserman (00:00:25.860):**  yeah that's that's okay let's try let's try alright.  Alright, so.  today's that occasion, and I wanted to introduce you to a very interesting person.  Her name is there, King Ferris so she's born in 1938 and passed away at the age of I guess 71 and 2009.  Now anybody from New Jersey it's not a college i'm familiar with, but Stockton college it's a school that's about an hour from Philadelphia so southern part of New Jersey more like Atlantic city so she was the president of the university for 20 years so from 1983.  Well, she was President for 20 about 20 years and just listen to that she was the first female African American president of New Jersey public college and one of the very first in the nation.  Now, this is a woman who is obviously in a world in 1968 right after the civil rights movement and she had an illustrious education.  I think, really, culminating in a PhD at the University of Massachusetts but look at where she came from just to get a feeling for this Atlantic city New Jersey attended Atlantic city high school graduated in 1954 she would tended to ski university and got a degree in biology in 1959.  Then she went on, and she was at the University of Michigan for a while and I believe she met her husband there a man named Ferris James Ferris and she got her science.  Science she got a doctorate and taught for a while, at stony brook at the University of new welcome Brock Brock what and at the University of Mississippi Michigan.  And she was in then after I think she might have been in administration, so she served as Vice President of academic affairs at kean university.  And look at this, this is a woman who in 1992 was named New Jersey woman of the year 1994 the New Jersey policy maker of the year, my executive women of New Jersey so to me, this is an illustrious career and take a look at one more thing about her about what she accomplished.  Under the leadership of Ferris Stockton became a nationally ranked institution increasing SA T scores minority enrollment and retention.  She also established one of the nation's first holy cross resource centers and the first master's program and look at all the costs and genocide studies during his tenure there he attended the College constructed a buildings sports Center.  quad West quad health building the world's largest geothermal heating and cooling system pretty darn good.  Okay, so I think we can leave it at that and just say that person deserves a little bit of a dedication, but there's a reason why I chose her and it's very different than anything that you could ever imagine, and you ready Ryan all right.  I went to the University of New York at stony brook.  Now it's interesting to me because I had wonderful professors Charlie walcott became the head of the cornell lab of ornithology.  Join emmons family some of the most major papers, I read an evolutionary psychology he taught a small class in college and that's where I got interested in my field, a man named he love costs and was one of the very greatest you know lectures and just awarded.  The very, very best Professor I have ever had is veera King Ferris.  She taught a class now I didn't know the research, because it was 1970 1969 so that means it's over 50 years ago.  I had a class with virat King Ferris and think about this for a second I can sit here remember where I sat in the room, listening to this dynamic absolutely enthralling Professor talk about Paris a tautology.  My book on my shelf is my book in Paris apology for that course.  I had a course, and I remember her talking about schistosomiasis that says toads and Trevor toads and she would so great as a lecturer, but not only that she was the most sweetest nicest warmest education or education.  Professor I had what she did was at the end of an exam the class had probably somewhere between I can't remember exactly maybe 60 students 70 students.  And it was a tiered lecture hall now again i'm remembering this 50 years ago.  And she when she gave me an exam she gave it back and then had little gift packages for awards that she gave out and she gave out like 20 or 30 awards.  You know the silliest answer the best answer that you know this and that and I remember sitting there thinking that this is incredible.  And she was so that, and so you know I love, Melissa, I think, Melissa is one of the best professors you'll ever have and part of what she does is engage you in so much.  That, then, these were the people that actually influenced me that's interesting because I remember them, because this is my field but Paris.  Which is not my field, but so they listen to lectures we didn't have anything of flipped classrooms or anything like that.  But what she did was inspired me to become a better teacher and actually I remember that what she taught there, I remember the subject matter.  talk to your parents if they have any recollection of something they did 15 years ago the answer will probably be no This makes it very special.  I went to the website for Stockton university and I looked her up but they didn't have anything any memorial or anything like that the only thing was that the name.  Of the boulevard that the university headquarters was on was very keen Ferris boulevard but he didn't say I couldn't find anything about her in there, so I looked it up so that's my dedication okay.  crazy right crazy where we live in, Melissa that all right.

**Melisa Osborne (00:07:40.950):**  That was great.

**wasserman (00:07:42.480):**  All right.

**Melisa Osborne (00:07:43.140):**  I love that dedication.

**wasserman (00:07:45.150):**  All right now, let me just do one thing more because again it's a fun thing for me to do so, you have been experiencing very difficult times, and you know i'm saying that what you've gone through with the pandemic is unparalleled.  The generation of my parents was called the great generation, and this was a generation that had to deal with World War Two, and that was difficult.  And in terms of you know, every generation is something, and this is what your experiences is really difficult and I just want to give you a little flavor of what I was experiencing college back in 1970.  And you might guess so first of all sunnybrook was a school that was close to New York City and it had the luxury of bringing in remarkable.  Speakers and bands and music and you would go to the gym and you would actually sell the four tops or you would actually go, so I don't know if you know who pillowcases and.  Jefferson and played the WHO, I mean, these are this is music I don't know if you guys, am I, on the right way, the way there is that music yeah Okay, so I mean this was this was the world we were living in.  I mean the very most amazing charismatic speaker I ever heard was Muhammad Ali, this is when he was basically.  avoid you know did want to serve in the service, he was a conscientious objector and he came to speak at the school.  So, you know that was part of it, it was you know with kids we didn't know what was going on it's like you know that's there, but then the war became an issue.  And there was an organization called student for students for the democratic excuse me, what is it it's the students with democratic society SDS and you know this is a group and I found myself in protest marches.  I found myself out there, trying to deal with the Vietnam War and suggesting that we don't.  You know, we should be finding work and what what is very interesting thing just on a personal note.  Is my dad served in World War Two he was you know in there and I remember sitting around the dinner table and again, you know early late late 60s.  and realize that he was against and opposed to the Vietnam War, there was no reason for it.  And sort of gave me a lot more respect for what you know he thought, and you know this is these these things that i'm showing you are from the.  Student newspaper that came out so this statement against the Vietnam War and again, you know what you are experienced is is truly remarkable and I just want to say that we all have had various issues over the course of time, and this was one that I thought was.  Something I just could bring up and say you know everything, everything is on a continuum and you're continuing I do believe is incredibly difficult and I admire every one of you for what you've been able to accomplish okay alright alright, so now we'll move on let's get to work and.  I was going to play a little bit of Arlene geronimus, but I think you could do that on your own she is the person who has come up with this idea of weather and.  And that's the topic for today, this link over here right below it it starts with the Shannon Irving dedication that we made last week and then the second half of it is an interview with drama dramas and it's a very good interview so i'll let you know if you wish to to listen.  Now, would you be able to alright so she is this person who has talked about weathering and the effect of systemic racism has on aging.  And we've got to develop a little bit of of how you go about looking at that, please interrupt if there's any questions you have.  So epigenetic biological mechanisms and look the problem that we're talking about is that we have systemic racism in the country.  We have stress, we have people that are living in poverty and under stress all the time and it exposes them to specific health risks, so the coping of that stress is.  Constant and it's going to affect people that are subject to that and in our world and our country, those are black patients.  So you've got to look at the environmental and social factors that actually lead to what's going to happen with aging, and we have to look at the effect on the chains So what does stress due to you genetically.  One of the things that it might have done is might have made black people have on a roll the covert 19.  So we have been throughout this entire course, so this is again, please understand this so much of what i'm showing you today is from Melissa.  And I think she put this together and it's it's absolutely correct we've made it very clear and I think it's pretty well established that race is not biological.  However, as it says here, it does kill people, and I think that's the problem that is the problem we have to deal with.  So if you want to think about how that plays out in terms of health and science.  A number of common diagnostic tests for heart problems kidney disease and pregnancy, have been adjusted, based on the belief that of patients key bodily functions can vary significantly depending on race or ethnicity.  Now, you would think that that's left to hospitals in the middle of nowhere no mass general hospital brigham and women's hospital so when Jesse becomes a physician.  They are going to be faced with these issues of look at the way in which people are evaluated and what risks they're at and how much of it is based on racial differences.  So mgh and brigham and women's no longer is just the results of a popular test for kidney function quote EGF are eliminating the race correction in kidney disease says we qualify up to one every three black patients for more advanced care.  Last week we talked about how black patients aren't coming in to deal with long overdue and that might result in more effective treatment of the disease.  urology the stone score predicts the likelihood of kidney stones, the origin, race factor it's three points possible 13 for patient identified as non black.  Now it doesn't work these things don't make sense, it needs to people who are of color being actually miss well not treated properly.  by assigning the lowest score to black patients and stone algorithm they steer clinicians away from the thorough evaluation kidney stones and black patients.  And effort to externally evaluate the stone score determine that the origin, race variable was not actually predictive of the risk of kidney cells.  Now that's recent, this is a Boston global article from a couple weeks ago, so how long has that been going on and apparel of the development of new model for predicting urinary tract infection in children simply assigns lower risk of children identified is fully or partially black.  These things aren't accurate and yet they're part of our medical care system.  So we have to be concerned as this course says in the it's it's racism and basically systemic racism in health and science.  So the description and explanation of racial and ethnic health disparities, is a very active field of study.  And there are a lot of ways in which people were trying to eliminate it I think that's the goal here, so if you think about how this plays out you've got to identify the bias identify what the effect is on certain populations of color and then try to deal with it alright.  If you look at this, then one of the things that Joanna most is talking about is weathering and i'm not sure how much you guys.  are familiar with this, but weathering is a term sheet defined.  And it states that chronic exposure to social and economic disadvantages leads to accelerated decline of physical health outcomes and could partially explain racial disparities and a wide array of health conditions so that's the definition.  And what do you do, how do you go about determining whether it's an aging, and this is where the science comes in, and this is where I think you want to be able to.  Vivian do you want to be the first one up i'll go around the room very and then Matthew then then then okay keep going around Okay, so if that's okay alright.  So we're signing with this idea of what is weathering and what is aging, and you know enough about this idea of methylation.  And there are cells that become escalated, most of which are in the promoter regions, not the gene itself.  And you can actually go in and actually count the number of methyl groups now, if you do that you're looking at this particular this is few studies that Melissa put up.  And here is the human genome contains 30,000 cpt G islands CP G is cytosine attaching to a phosphate attaching to a guanine.  And it turns out that most of these genes are in the promoter regions and then, most of them remain on math related.  But as a person ages, it becomes more related, and now it was interesting to me that last year the last semester in this discussion as soon to raise the issue well why are we talking only about methylation, why are we also talking about a settled.  And I think Melissa do you want to weigh in on that because I I remember your presentation last year about the fact that you're looking at antibodies to the.  To the genes that are that are have to do with histones do you want to say something.

**Melisa Osborne (00:19:10.080):**  Well, so so it's interesting because I am better informed than I was the last time this topic came up.  And it's interesting because so both methylation and assimilation affect the accessibility of genes for transcription right and are these epigenetic controls of how much gene expression is coming from particular regions.  And at the time that I put things together last semester so Fred I think you, you can correct me if i'm wrong, but my understanding is that DNA methylation is a more transient way of modifying the gene expression patterns, whereas.  A histone a seed elation is is sort of like the more permanent way.

**wasserman (00:20:02.610):**  Yes, that's true yes and but but it's harder to measure.  Go ahead, you talk you tell them.

**Melisa Osborne (00:20:11.400):**  Oh no I mean that's all I was going to say and that, like the thing the thing about it is yeah there are different methods for being able to measure the different things so in order to measure.  methylation you have to be able to use sort of the sequencing technologies with like bells and whistles that can detect the methylation state which is very hard, because you're trying to detect this really little ch three group right.  Whereas with histones and Seattle groups yeah you can have antibodies that specifically detect sort of the phosphor elated state and structural changes right yes.  So yeah.

**wasserman (00:20:51.600):**  yeah no okay so so what i'm about to show you is basically.  The methylation patents.  we're not going to deal with the simulation simulation because I haven't had seen anybody that studies that in terms of whether it.  And I don't know if there was any studies out there, done that so that's interesting Okay, so now.  let's take a look at the first study, which is extremely influential this paper Hannon isn't looking at race and weathering it's simply looking at.  weathering and age it's trying to correlate the two so Vivian take a look at the first sort of way this works, they build a model of aging, and they look at more than 450,000 CG markers from the whole blood so for blood and we'll get back to that and, second, of 650 60 minutes from age.  The model ratio measures, the rate at which individuals method alone ages and so on, especially methylation which is impacted by gender and genetic variants.  Differences of aging rates help explain epigenetic drift and are reflected in the transcript on alright so Moreover, the ag motto is held in other human tissues and reveals an aging advanced age age tumor.  tumor tissue okay now here's what I want you to do, can you look at this and sort of see how this plays out you have here methylation age and then this elastic net regression that's basically the regression.  And then you have a predicted age and what you're looking at is a person's 2040 6080 100 and then, if you look at this you're taking a look at the Association of methyl methylation in the genome and what does it tell you in this case, for I think this is.  predict age is be is.  All well ma si si is out of several directions of validation of a cohort So what is that telling you about as you get older, what is the what is the chance that you become your genome becomes more isolated.  it's very strong right the relationship is incredibly significant and it's really pretty tight our is 9.96 through.  So what you're looking at is if I were to look at my let's say my specific methylation pattern now I should come out somewhere right there.  Now, if I happened to be black for living in poverty or on the stress it might be over there.  that's one enough this paper doesn't do that this paper gives us a standard curves so that says, this is what we can see.  Here is a difference between males and females Vivian what to say about the agent pattern in males and females well what's it look like it says, first of all there's a difference and which individual agents fast males or females.  In it's, not to say you can't explain but it's actually you know, obviously males will at.  least that's.  logical but it's go ahead, Melissa.

**Melisa Osborne (00:24:32.490):**  How do they know that that's a significant difference.

**wasserman (00:24:35.340):**  I don't think it is yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (00:24:37.380):**  I didn't I wasn't thinking it it looked very significant, but there's not really anything on there for.

**wasserman (00:24:43.890):**  Now, and we don't.  that's a very good point, because when you read all of these papers What is interesting is this paper may have well this one's fine this one seems to be sort of a standard for everyone does follow.  But the papers that i'm going to be talking about in a minute actually start out by saying that we have 400 papers 370 say something different, this one says this and we're looking at this one there's so remarkable.  variation even if one of them comes out to be significant, there are many other studies that say what we're telling you today what I am telling you today may not be completely correct.  But this as sort of like my standard curve seems to be okay it's telling us that, as you get older you're going to have more methylation.  And I think that that's the standard now.  What you want to do and what the next paper is that i'm going to.  show you that Matthew is going to tell us about is, what do you want to do next, you tell me, before I throw it up.  not throw up but throw it up.  Here So what do you think i'm going to show you now, as the next paper.  Any idea.  What do you want to know, I now know that as people get older that they can have more methylation.  What do you want to know what do you want to do.  let's show you let's work let's work together all right now on this particular paper before we get there.  They found 72 genes that are associated with this CG islands and so that's quite a few.  And so, if they're looking at these 72 and actually get more but they're looking at these genes they find that relationship that, as you get older these specific genes become escalated.  So, if you look at the markers that they had take a look at what some of the gene supposedly a related.  outside his disease, cancer tissue degeneration DNA damage oxygen oxidative stress to the markers the summit of Staten key regulator any brain and nervous system function.  So, if you look at this sst is known to decline, with age and is willing to outsiders disease so you're looking at genes that seem to have something to do with the with.  What we associated with aging and that's that's that's there, so it is pretty good so they have a it's a pretty good standard study and I like that.  All right now again from this paper, I think this is important, and this is something that Melissa spoke about quite a bit last semester.  notice that each of the tissues is going to have a different curve so, for instance, over here if you looking at the breast tissue is right in the middle.  And if you're looking at the long it's much more likely to be better related I don't know if longer breast tissue with matter in general but Matthew does that surprise you.

**no speaker (00:27:58.680):** Is the President very different.

**wasserman (00:28:02.790):**  yeah it shouldn't surprise us because each of these tissues is under different regime it's going to be escalated at different times different places and different said.  So you may not have more methylation in one particular part of the body versus another, so this specific this particular article does deal with blood, Melissa anything you want to add to that.

**Melisa Osborne (00:28:26.790):**  Now that's great I I found this to be really like it was one of those things that it's it's not surprising, but at the same time you're like oh that's so cool that it's different you know.

**wasserman (00:28:39.960):**  Now, how about this figure that here Matthew the one and see.  What do you think it's a lot more.

**no speaker (00:28:55.200):** productive.

**wasserman (00:28:57.330):**  yeah so now that's interesting isn't it, what if you could figure out a way to slow that down.  and treat cancer by dealing with this, I don't know if it's ever going to be possible.  But essentially you're identifying that cancer cells seem to have show more methylation and basically are supposedly aging now remember this is one measure of weathering it's measure of aging.  And it's a good one Okay, but here's where I want to go, what are you going to do, and you ready okay so take a look at what they do here.  They look at black women with low incomes versus high incomes and now use the data to see a black woman with a low income is showing a greater aging, for her age, then, is predicted.  make sense now also the paper it's actually quite interesting because what they do is they explain why they choosing black women, instead of black men.  And it makes sense, because this is the greatest stability that is likely in the jobs and whatever But OK, and then the other thing is what else do you want to look at besides income, what do you think.  What are the factors could come into play it's all questionnaires, which is also debatable whether or not they're reliable.  Education absolutely what else.  Was that.  Located where do you live is good and.  Oh, my.  In that paper we read at the beginning of class, I mean trump made a comment about location, I thought was interesting and implying that people from particular space, but that's that's not you know they're okay yeah how about diet.  about smoking about alcohol use now what factors, do you think will become important.  yeah I mean would that would lead to greater aging.

**no speaker (00:31:20.520):** Oh.

**wasserman (00:31:24.840):**  yeah.  So this is what they're doing in this paper let's take a look at the results and let's see what you feel they're being an analyst okay.  So this is with income and zero to 4004 to 812 16 etc, and if you look at this figure what it's suggesting is that at this point, this is basically individuals that have a greater aging than the average, which is zero.  And the control and these are people in this particular part of the figure that have less aging than the control control is zero what does it tell you.

**no speaker (00:32:14.940):** Control.

**wasserman (00:32:16.740):**  Yes, so, so what you're looking at is very clear that if you're earning less than in this particular example $3,900 you're under incredible stress and you're going to show greater aging now the type of type of questionnaires that they are asking are questions that they're asking are.  You able to build pay your bills on time.  You know, things like I just from addiction, I mean it's all this kind of stuff where you're trying to get a measure for economic.  You know, stability and in this particular case, in this particular paper they use the hand in data to come up with that baseline of what agent should be.  And they show you that people who are earning less income if they're women in their black.  are going to get this now, let me say once again not all the studies come out with this type of result.  and actually surprise you, either because it's incredibly difficult to collect this kind of data, these kind of data.  This makes it even clear, and this will be your last one So what is this one tell you now just take a look at how it's being presented the portion of individuals that actually have these accelerated aging is white accelerated aging is a black so just summarize the figure for me.

**no speaker (00:33:44.340):** Are.

**wasserman (00:33:48.630):**  The much more likely to have accelerated aging yeah.  Great array come so it's a nice paper, but once again ah, let me just state that there are a lot of papers with somewhat different results various health related behaviors such as diet exercise smoking, alcohol consumption do not explain the same effect on aging, as does info.  that's an interesting result to me, I mean that was that was interesting to this particular paper anybody else think that surprises or not.  So income itself causes is income stress causes the agent financial pressure had a strong effect on accelerated Asian and mediated the influence of low income that alone can pass on aging.  is finding support the view that stress chronic financial pressure can exert a weathering the fact that results of premature aging.  Alright, so we have a nice second paper that goes with the first paper and tells us that aging is reflected differences in people because of their economic status.  Right you ready again okay now once again, let me just state, so you have the epigenetics which we've gone through in detail.  I haven't yet dealt with telling me away that i'm going to do that.  Before doing that I just want to talk about this, our static load again that's something we talked about and I stayed away from it, because I think he going to get more lectures on that.  Would felicity Crawford consider but i'll just sort of a deal with that and Alice static load is combination of all these effects on stress.  And this can lead to chronic stress it can also lead to inflammation, these are all facts that have to do weathering agent.  Now the Teal and my live is something that i'm not sure you're all familiar with, but at the ends of the chromosomes there are sections there that are repeated sections.  And then repeat, is a TT a GG GG thousands and thousands of times and much more so in stem cells, then in cells that aren't themselves so they kept the chromosome.  And they will actually as the cell begins to divide the chromosomes are basically duplicated they become shorter and shorter.  This prevents the cell from actually becoming non functional and the question is, do people who are under stress actually have a shorter telomere length and, secondly, as it relates to this issue, as you get older does the telomere length of caps diminish what effect.  Both assesses the good answer so, in other words, as you get older and older the telomere length goes down.  Once again, you want sort of that standard curve to measure is it more so than what the average would be for each age and and they do this.  So it's not only the methylation that they come up with, but the telomere length and I love the term weather rate, I think, journalists, really gets into a good.  Point there but it's it's a different way of looking at things it's a different way of looking at the deterioration of the cells.  So telling me as a section to the fact that the ends of chromosomes consistent repeat sequences and I just you know went to my little.  rosetta stone of DNA, which I thought was interesting, but I was trying to think you know well, I mean here's the rosetta stone right.  So it's ta ta which would bring in a Lucy and it's GG GG which would actually take a you know it's a trike wrote on you guys know that and so it's a je je je, which is, I think, at the very bottom here.  or somewhere here JI JI JI there, there is it's here it's a it's actually a glycine it's on the bottom of this below this little figure.  It is so you know, and I don't know why I, you know that's the actual code for human so maybe mammals, I guess it's the TPA je je je je je a je je je it's not bringing in the amino acid it's not it doesn't do that it's just codes.  and builds up builds up and protects the cell from becoming non functional as to begin to divide.  And this happens early in life, in other words the the the the methylation happens early this is important it's very important for the southern continually function properly.  And you can sort of just see how this plays out it prevents the common sense of sticking together allows the chrome something replicated properly during cell division.  Every time to sell carries out DNA replication the chromosome shorted by 25 to 200 basis, so of course, the question is, if you are black if you are under stress, are you more subject to the weathering at the telomeres.  And you can look at this just if you look at this telomere is an Amazon oh so tell them here, and this is.  race right Melissa your pronunciation.  dilemma races embrace.

**Melisa Osborne (00:39:40.170):**  horrible I think I called them telomeres the whole time.

**wasserman (00:39:43.530):**  I don't know what the right pronunciation is but I remember you.

**no speaker (00:39:47.250):** You.

**wasserman (00:39:51.120):**  Alright, so this is an enzyme.  That actually.  Is there to prevent the deterioration of the cell like so you can measure the amount to two wheel to embrace and you can actually measure there for the.  likelihood that the cell is going to age, so there are low concentrations in somatic cells as you would guess because he sells that regularly used.  The dilemma race, as they age, leading to a reduction in normal function, however, in the germline cells in the stem cells, the telomere length is maintained after DNA replication and the cells and not show any signs of aging because of a very high.  amount of telomerase in their high levels in cancer cells.  So, once again, you know you look at this and you say to yourself, is it going to be nice 50 years from now, when they come out there and be able to tell us that we can treat cancer by effectively diminishing telomerase.  In the particular cells that are causing cancer is setting giving somebody these really terrible you know therapy therapy drugs, I mean it's always been amazing to me that.  What we what we how long we've been fighting cancer and how we haven't really succeeded, there is success, but I wish there was more I wish there was more.  Alright, so you understand that what dilemma races, you understand what to me is our and now, of course, what we've got to do is look at the potential of studying this for our particular course and again, Melissa loves these failures, so you can actually light up the.  And look at that look at those those are so good that really shows you where the the caps on and actually you can actually see this one didn't do so well it's got a little bit of a cow, so you know that's there.  Alright, so turns out that the thing that the people that figured out the function of telomeres win a Nobel Prize in 2009 this gentleman jack stuff SEC is over at mgh as well as lamb is.  Alright So what about telomeres and stress well that's pretty interesting it's gonna be hard to measure but i'm going to just show you the paper and amanda if you would.  Take a look at the data now, this is not that clear the blue here are the controls and you can read what this says is the perceived stress scale.  Now what now I read this paper three times and i'm not sure what it wasn't good but, but what are they what I what I think has been done here is, they ask people a question there and they are measuring their perception of their stress.  You know I can't go for water kick it out and House who knows what they're asking and then that's telling me away.  And those results actually are non significant in the be figure.  that's this is how I read the paper, Melissa please once again correct me if i'm wrong.  In the figure a what you're looking at is me longevity of the stress, and these are parents that have taken care of young with maybe serious illness illnesses that have been one year versus 12 years that becomes positive.  know so does that sound right.

**Melisa Osborne (00:43:34.770):**  Well, so I do you do, you talk about this, I believe this is women.

**wasserman (00:43:40.950):**  Oh yes, of course, women.

**Melisa Osborne (00:43:42.810):**  Which which I I think last semester, I mentioned that I found one of the things about this paper that was very interesting was the fact that they focused on women caregivers and.  And only only women as being the caregivers.  Not they didn't try to see if it was just universal for people that are caregivers so.

**wasserman (00:44:11.430):**  It was women taking care of children with severe disabilities.

**Melisa Osborne (00:44:15.870):**  Right exactly.

**no speaker (00:44:18.090):** yeah.

**wasserman (00:44:19.920):**  So you can ask the people questions and it didn't correlate at all, but when you then put in the factor of how long you've been exposed.  Once again I have to stay that this particular paper states at the very beginning, that there are a number of papers out there that don't show this effect.  right but, but again look at where we're going with the three papers we've talked about the first one was just simply setting up weathering the effect of methylation.  The second one was taking a look at people who were black and women and economics and they're there.  And this one is now getting further into stress, so I think the message the bottom line messages there's a lot of work that's been out there, trying to explore.  The possibility that stress is leading to a greater chance of aging in populations of people were black now whether or not you know, again, Melissa has on.  The website and number of papers which you might read and the results aren't always going to be the same, so I can only give you a little bit of a sample of what you might expect.  On this is a little bit better and that paper.  So what we've got here for the demonstration of relationship between stress and tell me they've seen.  Upon comparing the two street groups, those in the highest and lowest quach roles.  So it's just taking those that are extremely high stress and extremely low stress and there you get more of a significant result.  So these groups was similar in age tobacco use vitamin us and the high stress group as an employee higher being BMI the analysis of covariance will perform controlling for age and BMI independent of the hdmi the high stress group had significantly shorter telomeres.  Now then it's fine that initially, but if you then did this strikingly the high stress group also has to be what would tell him tell him or his telomerase activity and high oxidative stress that low stress group so it's an interesting result again.  Alright, in this particular paper, which is a different one we show significant associations with stress stress and telomere shortening or non Western setting so in this case, what they did they went to the I don't know if any idea about this, but the sorry sorry.  Anybody know anybody where that might be etc well and what they're looking at is these people here, they would displace the 1998 to 2002.  and raise the research in this particular paper show this stress cases stress induced telomere shortening as a consequence of the race, now that paper that.  We showed you last class that Melissa found on wanda which was very recent you know they can look at it, there too, so people are interested in this into studying in detail.  So telomeres.  don't know it's the kind of thing that I would like to be able to sit here and tell you that stress causes and decreases telomere length I can't do that I can't because the data is not all that clear and i'll show you the reason why.  i'm here is race and telling me elaine and take a look at this white and Joe Joe.  Joe senior correctly yeah I see that my middle name is joey.  yo it's interesting my niece's joey and my granddaughter's Athena.  So we're related.  Go ahead so take a look at this one Okay, so this is telomere length this is white black and Hispanic.  This is predicted TV live with age by race for females, and this is males.  You would like it to be a lot cleaner than this, so, in other words, if you go up on top, there is the result that you sort of would expect so white individuals have longer telomere length probably due to low stress than both blacks and Hispanics But then when you come down here to females.  The younger, you are the greater than the TV waves in black dude last in Spanish and white So what does it tell me I don't know.  I have no idea what that means, but as an interest in his own right.  Alright, so finally finally but almost finally but race and telomere length.  So we examine the change your leukocyte and the thing that you're going to do this, too, so we examine the change and leukocyte telomere length lt DC and it's linked with race.  So sort of this progression of events and logics you go out there, you find out effect on weathering in in this case methylation.  Then you go ahead and start looking at it people, people would income differences.  And now we're getting down to the stage where we're actually coming back to that point where we are trying to drive home.  The idea that do black individuals have greater weathering then white individuals and the results are not that clear.  We use the unique data set containing data on again this is Lucy leukocyte telomere length at birth and in mid our adulthood.  Okay, and then given the links between ltc and government length and disease variation a point to a racial health disparity.  We propose black individuals will have shorter telling me a late due to race based social stress blacks begin with longer ltc least women do right than whites but on the go more rapid shortening take a look at the data and see if that supports what's what they just said.

**no speaker (00:50:49.170):** very accurate see that will walk to the crocodile it does decrease way quickly compared to the way the block out the is still longer.

**wasserman (00:51:04.650):**  Yes, maybe not submit whoa this significant on the boat point 05 so, but the thing is really interesting is that at birth.  The black individuals in defense of the longer telomere length that's infants than whites.  Now, why is that true I don't know how bad the last, yes, the left side shown.  Now, if you combine that with the next result what they say in this paper is that then as adults that distinctive difference that they started with live longer telomeres is gone.  So you can make the case that what happened during the course of a lifetime, is that there's greater aging in individuals like that.  But I don't know again.  Why is it that you start out where you start out but that's essentially what they're doing so my question for you Athena is is this worth while effort, I mean, should we put a lot of effort into this, I mean it's certainly true that aging and stress are going to be related.  Should we be looking at telling them that's what my thought was what I was reading newspapers I don't know.

**no speaker (00:52:34.260):** Like. Let. me.

**wasserman (00:52:42.750):**  Let me ask the boss boss.  What do you think is this a fruitful.  line of research.

**Melisa Osborne (00:52:53.370):**  yeah I mean that's a really great.

**wasserman (00:52:58.620):**  You know just you.

**Melisa Osborne (00:53:00.000):**  Know i'm here i'm just like stuttering cuz I know I know i'm actually not really sure because, like, I think, in some respects it's a it's a hypothesis that makes sense, you know, in a way right that.  You might think that the the telomeres would have differences in aging when you put it this way, and you think about it, I think, for me it does kind of raises the question of Is this the best read out for stress so like or are there other.  It well so there's a couple of things, first of all, these are leukocyte telomeres right.  Yes, is that the Blessed place to be looking at telomeres.  Or are there other places it other tissues where it would be better now granted right I think leukocytes are easily available right, you can just get them from blood right.  yeah so that's part of why they chose that and not like a brain right because you can't look at a brain.  During someone's life.  But like so there's there's that's one question is, is that the best place to be looking and then I think the other question is, are there, better readouts like for stress.

**wasserman (00:54:22.020):**  Yes.

**Melisa Osborne (00:54:22.830):**  i'm not I don't know if I know the answers to those things actually.

**wasserman (00:54:28.410):**  No, I agree with you and i'm reading the papers, where they kept on saying some that was showing some effects on that was not showing some effect.  I think it's going to be very difficult to come up with a conclusion that telomere length, is a good predictor I just think it's gonna be really difficult to do.  And doesn't mean that it's not happening it's just I think it's gonna be difficult, but that's simply i'm very naive that i'm not sure, but it struck me as we want to know about aging, we want to know about racism and aging, and I just seem to me that this one is going to be tough.  But I think, maybe I could be wrong good.

**Melisa Osborne (00:55:11.160):**  Did you think of any other systems that you.

**wasserman (00:55:13.470):**  Thought might be bad that's True, the only other one is the methylation and.  They should be doing more of that like they could have taken that Rwanda, study and looked at the effect of methylation I mean you could have done it.  But you know again it's so hard to do, I mean stress is such a difficult topic and I get them thinking about that because.  stress the list two years for the people who are black is enormous enormous what what happened in terms of people losing their jobs, it was like.  40% of black people lost their work less than jobs in the last two years because of the type of jobs they had it was it was just so drastic and.  That goes back to that paper we really the beginning of class it really drives home the point that there's a problem, but I don't I had a I had a hard time with this only because the data that we were looking at was not really convincing to me.  that's that's what i'm suggesting alyssa, what do you think.

**Melisa Osborne (00:56:27.270):**  I don't disagree with that and, and I think part of why.  I think it's but I i've never shied away from.  Being real about when things are current field of study, and you know.  being kind of actively investigating like in some respects I feel like these might be newer hypotheses and so they're still really out for debate.

**no speaker (00:56:55.230):** yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (00:56:56.760):**  In terms of like the telomere thing directly, I mean the idea that stress is attached to health and heart health and things, I think that is very clearly shown.  But like this, like at the molecular level here, you know, this might be something that's just still being looked at and still really active area.

**wasserman (00:57:18.750):**  Okay, I think that's good good answer Okay, and then this is more from this particular study discrimination and TV leave the current story is restricted to African American Pacific participants and this particular part of it is here 15 verses 25.  And it looks like there is something going on.  Racial Discrimination at near 15 was not significantly associated with the change to my life, however, it consistent with linear regression finance, there was a significant association.  Between the lane change and racial discrimination and leading change in lieu society loose aside telomere length experience racial discrimination and more domains was associated with ltc lt lt shortly so in this particular paper I think they do come up with a result that would be.  Interested so here is the takeaway there is an association between total length and shortening and race, it is likely, the chronic stress from discrimination plays in the row.  And unraveling the mechanisms and very active field of study and I don't know if you guys can pick some of these papers out for your you know you get your work later on, but it's there OK now, I just want to deal with this.  sort of last part of the lecture Alice static load stress response, and we have here this idea that Alice static stress load is important.  What is it it's a cumulative effect of stress during life events.  And in this particular case, what we're looking at is there is symptoms, which include aches and pains and some the a weakness less socialization unfocused thinking, so what we're talking about is defining stress.  Now, in this paper by dramas she likes to look at 10 biomarkers and she brings it into this algorithm and so systolic and diastolic.  blood pressure body mass are looked at in these exams, and then you take a look at gli sated email global albumin created created in.  glucagon clearance triglycerides and all these other things cholesterol in the blood, and this is the results, let me state from the very beginning.  Is that there's not much significance here there isn't as difference Would you mind just coming back to just looking at this particular one.  white men are the black boxes on the bottom white women are the white boxes right above.  Black men are the circles and black women are the don't filled in circles black women are the open circles so you're looking at predicted probability and versus age and so here's.  sort of the you know, the combination of this lecture, this is what you're trying to get to was the show you.  it's a it's a probability is I guess.  Oh that's a good question i'm not quite sure.  Look, I didn't do it, I don't remember exactly what they meant, but I guess what it is, is.  I looked at it as the relationship is very good, well correlated with age 50 vs.  Well, with the bounce of telling me elaine's so i'm not sure i'm.  And stress and stress this is stress so stress, leading to greater.  g hold on a SEC, let me just think about this for just one second.  I think it's work is the telomere length, so I think what it is that.  At age 40.  let's take a look at what we've got so let's imagine a 40 if you're a black woman, then the probability is higher that you're telling me this is what is going to be affected by your race, I guess, I.  apologize, I should have been better prepared to this.  Let me take a look at the next slide if they've given us more among the poor, the relative odds of having a high score continued to favor whites.  But the point estimates was essentially lower than for this or sad or close to par ages younger than 35 and not significantly significant to conventional levels for any group.  So this is a property, this is pri PR Providence poverty income ratio of oh OK OK that's that's different so.  Poverty income ratio and again weathering so as you go up in age, then what it means is that there's going to be greater.  weathering in a black person that has a lower income level and person that has a higher income level.  It doesn't it's not very different, though, but it it's a.  it's it's not, these are not significant, but I think it's an interesting way of going at the problem I apologize, I should have been better prepared for that.  Melissa i'm not gonna put you on the spot, you didn't look at it, you weren't prepared right so blacks have higher scores than the widespread had a greater probably have a high score in wages.  Particularly ages 35 to 64 racial differences will not explained by poverty, whereas in the previous example what sorry poor non for black woman had the highest second highest probability high.  Our static load scores stress, respectively, and the highest access scores compared with the male or white counterparts.  It basically goes to what we think is is happening if you're poor and you're going to have more stress and you're going to have a greater well if you're poor you're gonna have more stress I guess what that is.  I pass over this one too quickly all right.  We collected, a unique data set of 30 this is against paramus three 239 black white Mexican adults from a stratified multistage probability snapple a 3D Detroit.  neighborhoods we drew really slow to measure telomere length and indicator stress mediated biological aging.  Linking respond that's telling me a link to the Community survey responses we regress telomere length associated that socio economic psychosocial neighborhood behavioral stresses hypothesized signify the interaction that's a lot of words, let me show you the beta.  Now.  What you've got to do is on this one, take a look at poor forces not poor, and this is being predicted telomere length, so if you wait and you poor versus if you wait and not cool.

**no speaker (01:05:14.580):** expected.

**wasserman (01:05:16.950):**  Then, and this is the second one if you're black well that's the same, but the next again if you're poor there that's higher than if you're basically not poor and beautiful telling the land.  For me, when I read this I said on what is the name and I don't know and that's why I think my overall impression of what's being done now is it's a difficult it's a difficult way of measuring stress an agent.  Just it's just very difficult and and maybe better than anything else out there, but I think it's just very difficult.  yeah panel open, finally, I believe, is everybody together so women poor and white.  disappears because you're you're summing up the difference between them.  telomere disease, we know that that's going to happen accelerate telomere nutrition correlated with arteriosclerosis.  cardiac poor cardiac outcomes and so it's a problem, and we know that the telomere length is affecting diseases, you can look at the perusal folder you can get a whole bunch of papers on that and I have a slide which was left out and mostly they're.  Back alright, this is for you.

**Melisa Osborne (01:06:55.860):**  All right.

**wasserman (01:06:56.340):**  All right, all right now, remember, we talked a lot earlier about jeans and the way I had to cut to a one cartoon I found the gene for everything I don't know Melissa showed you that slide earlier this.

**Melisa Osborne (01:07:12.750):**  yeah.

**wasserman (01:07:13.140):**  Alright alright, so I want to explain what this is because obviously it's not that clear, so the science science magazine our science magazine.  decided to get a concocts this contest going.  To talk about the genes on the y chromosome.  And they asked for contributions, now the sudden things that I never put the science too old to well that's a fact, something I didn't put the actual reference, but it is from science.  magazine Ryan is laughing already so let's take a look.

**Melisa Osborne (01:07:54.060):**  At when.  When did they do this.

**wasserman (01:07:58.200):**  It was like who knows.  50 years.  I don't know you're a.  Nice jeans right so cost is the subtext testings determining factor that's always know that there are white gene is good phil already found the gene that actually needs to know them.  But there is he back locusts me see Lucas did, and this is the y chromosome which makes it now that's the gadgetry Jane right, then you have the lf LPG that's perfectly TV channels all right now the Boc one G is for catching and throw in.  The vlc to gene is so confidence know where they that it is unlikely to ability.  Then we have here the ability to remember and tell jokes got what.  then be the the big for the sports page.  And then, at that time so whenever terminated to movie terminator movies, can have an average what.  You have here the addiction to death and destruction movies, the TV to gene, then the one for men, I think they can play the guitar in ri F G, then the one that says yes they're playing up there is a vc which is.  The diesel engine, there is the pre adolescent fascination with our rapid spiders and reptiles mom for eugene the Z have that one.

**Melisa Osborne (01:10:02.070):**  yeah.  He definitely has that one he has a beetle book yeah.

**wasserman (01:10:07.110):**  And then yeah.  Then you have one of the weirdest that came up published in science, there is an si T game to sit in on the john region.  And then we have the inability to express affection over the phone be changing.  The selective hearing loss gene I got that one.  He he.  And then, if you get your anniversary birthday, the people whose birthday lack of totally cold day the op sj.  goodbye.  See you later will be well because I don't know.  yeah well.

**Melisa Osborne (01:11:03.300):**  No, I have a reminder for everybody um.

