---
---

# Project Presentations

**Date:** 4/28/2022

**Athena Tejada (00:04:07.050):**  Everybody on zoom.  Hello.  Hello.  Hello.  projector.  Hello Oh, we thought should work now.  Okay, she can hear me perfect.  Okay guys, so my project is on eugenics and data, so my overall concept was the idea of the good gene, and does the concept of eugenics truly mean that.  Because when you break down the word itself that's what it originally was meant to me, but, as history has shown, there might be more of an underlying Ray system.  In terms of the statement of topic, as I said, i'm focusing on eugenics and data and some of the questions that i'm going to be addressed thing is what exactly is eugenics.  What is the connection between eugenics and racism and discrimination, what are some historical and current examples of eugenics and what can truly be done to ameliorate the effects of eugenics.  And the reason for my interest in this topic is that it's still happening today, and I think it's something that shouldn't be happening, since we have studied it as a class there's many people aware of it.  But a lot of the important people in this world are still not aware of it or don't want to believe it.  And in terms of things that i'm going to be discussing about our like for sterilization that we read about in the House of the prison system in the United States.  And a lot of people of color people with disabilities and LGBT Q plus individuals are still experiencing this and in terms of my format i'm going to be doing a podcast to educate on the topic.  And this main sources that i'm going to be synthesizing and using for this project are different examples of either modern day eugenics or historical examples of you eugenics.  And like I said the format that I chose is a podcast and I started making a website to like put all my podcast onto.  And it just starts with like i'm going to have here what exactly is eugenics written out, rather than having that as a separate podcast.  And then the three podcasts i'm going to be doing is Nazi eugenics as a historical example eugenics and America, which is both historical and also modern.  And, as well as some modern day eugenics in terms of advancing technologies in terms of being able to possibly choose different genes within a child, when a parent wants to have a kid.  And really delve into that one of the sources that i'll be using for that.  Was the film that I watched actually in one of my courses this year human nature, which focused on crispr nine and how that technology could be used to do this.  And one of the one things that stuck out to me, and this film was one of the patients that they were talking to was someone who was a child, experiencing sickle cell anemia.  And after all of this and learning about the possibility that one day he could prevent maybe his children from having this.  The child himself said that he didn't regret having sickle cell anemia because it taught him a lot of lifelong lessons that he never would have previously.  Experienced if he hadn't had this and just that idea of who truly knows what the good gene is because, if we start using this to manipulate things like hair color eye color who really decides what the better eye color is your hair color However, the other.  thing i'm going to delve a little bit into is the fact that there are some possibilities that this could help.  So, going back to illnesses some illnesses, we could possibly prevent from happening, a lot of neurodegenerative diseases, this could really help in terms of that and other things that.  would help the population, but then who gets to decide when we get to use it for good reasons or for those racist discriminated.  reasons and then going back to this.  So the main pieces that i'm going to be trying to get across is that the idea of practice and practices of.  eugenics is difficult to be considered moral, because who can really say what a good genus.  And my ultimate target audience is going to be the general population to increase awareness of the historical and current impacts of eugenics but also change can only happen with bigger people so that would be like government and public officials to create change.  Thank you.  um any questions or comments.  You know I didn't like in order to do like tend to gravitate towards like original person right so like, why did you decide to do.  So when I was thinking about this, I thought, what would be something that's.  Currently a really big way to reach out to a lot of people.  And I always find myself listening to podcasts especially like the daily that's really like captures everything that you need for the day to just be caught up in current events it's a really.  versatile tool and I love, a good traditional research paper but i've written so many in the past few years, that I wanted to shake it up and try something new.  I don't know because I know this film not we watched in our class was released a few years back, and obviously there has probably been more technological advances.  But it's going to be hard unless they put a committee together to really determine which I think they did at the time in the film.  Because it's going to be hard if any country has this technology, because we know that some countries are not going to use it for the right purposes, while others could benefit from it, because of their population suffering from certain diseases.  it's a possibility, and I think it's a strong possibility with everything going on, that they will use crispr nine but who will be the first one and that'll determine the path it's going to go in terms of being a good thing or a bad thing.  Sexual orientation.  And people were worried that they come in and start manipulating the embryos at that point, you can imagine the range of subjects that this test it's here it's.  There, a story hopefully years back to China that apparently did.  Genetic engineering real yes major.  and talking about that in terms of like genders for a while until in our lifetime, you could only have.  A certain amount of children in China, and to the fact that I know people today who are now in America, because they were sent here or adopted because they were girls they prefer having a male as like your family air to continue the family show very hard.  say.  One last thing I really.  are focusing on the ambiguity.

**no speaker (00:13:50.790):** there's both you know potential benefits and.

**Athena Tejada (00:13:55.440):**  dangers associated with this it's not a bad thing yeah and I think that's why it's like.  Then in our society for so long because nobody can really decide where one like where the black area and in the way it's such a Gray area, but nobody really wants to investigate it because they might come out looking like a bad guys.  People.  Have a different threshold for what's okay on that spectrum.  Thank you.

**Adam Labadorf (00:15:03.870):**  DJ do you have the one how did you hear me he did you have the spreadsheet link for the order and panty I don't have it.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:15:15.330):**  Let me look it up.

**Adam Labadorf (00:15:25.380):**  Who was next okay you guys know what's next I don't need a spreadsheet.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:15:33.870):**  i'm surprised.

**no speaker (00:15:34.620):** it's not fighting to go next.

**Meghana Saradchandra Peshwa (00:16:18.930):**  Actually, would it be okay if we try to turn on the lights just because it's it's really doesn't want to see the speaker the video switches over there.

**no speaker (00:16:31.140):** yeah.

**Meghana Saradchandra Peshwa (00:17:00.360):**  Not better.  At the accordion.  me got it like.  I think the contrast here, this is not work.  Now this just makes the screen heart, so thank you for something with you guys.

**no speaker (00:17:29.760):** Once again.

**Meghana Saradchandra Peshwa (00:17:39.660):**  hi everybody, my name is made no.  No just me and I are working on this project together and our topic is algorithmic bias and has Karen science and various mitigation strategies.  So, to get started.  And algorithm as a set of instructions used to perform a computational dusk and and algorithmic bias occurs when.  An algorithmic bias occurs, or it.  It favors one group over other groups, and this can be due to multiple reasons, one of the main reasons being that the data given to the algorithm is it says biased.  Or the algorithm is structured or written in such a way that it results in it being this.  And this is a lot of impacts and when it comes to health care it's it has bad consequences because nowadays there are many models or algorithms being me that perform predictions.  And if the data given to these algorithms is biased, or if the algorithm is not written correctly, then it can be it can have that consequences and also vs banned from additions are interested in orders, because we want to know how this works and how we can prevent it.  And then, for this project will be utilizing for research article searching for articles and two of these are richer research articles and one non research articles.  These articles talk about algorithmic bias and the ways, it can be mitigated and also presence few examples of various cases where alcohol snake bias has occurred.  And we are using a traditional research article format for this project to give across our opinions and and also the sunrise these research articles and research articles now regarding fountain of it for the slides.  So the brief summary why we wanted to build with algorithmic bias is because.  Usually in healthcare, like the data is from a certain group of people, mostly it will be from whites and then especially some algorithms we have discussed this in class like.  or some algorithms like a train on these sort of population data and as a result, they will Google particular score to.  Risk or for a disease to based on this population data and when this is applied to other groups of population we don't really know whether that is having a negative influence like.  We have discussed in class right coffee, the same risk score like that patients are mostly, then the white patients, and this is because of bias bias.  And the other thing is mostly the tech sector tends to be over represented by by people and is under represented by black and Latino people, and also by women, and this leads algorithm this causes the bias, to be more sexist and racist.  We also wanted to see how, in other countries are good at the MIC biases accepted and in countries such as India, that there is a.  social structure and cost structure, most of the data will be from people who are from the upper class and for this again causes the by visiting causes algorithmic bias in health care which discriminates against people who are not represented in that data so.  The mitigation strategies which we want to look at an IRA a synthesis is to see what social justice medicines are can be applied so that this bias, I will rhythmic bias can be corrected and.  In the articles that we saw most of them, the stated that proper regulations and greater transparency in the data as well as more trustworthy and diverse data would help remove algorithmic bias.  So this was like a image which I got from this website so it talks about more algorithmic biases this website, like those are very um a graphical view of that, and so.  It has classified bias either technical or society so in technical bias either the way, like it comes from the data, where the variable is omitted in the case of.  I can think of gender in which females are omitted, and so the data is mostly from men and then though either the data itself is of poor quality, where there is a lot of.  factors which are not corrected or adjusted in the data and then.  The way the data is selected like the population of the group that is selected, whereas the other group is not a very some groups are ignored and then societal bias it's obvious like economic bias, which means like groups which are having.  Which are represented in a data I basically have a high economic standard or there is a higher chance of them being represented.  And then, our cognitive and emotional bias might come from the person who's developing the algorithm like what is it what is this bias can get get inside algorithm and therefore it will cause the bias, so in this project.  We want to focus on the various examples and outcomes and how algorithmic bias can be mitigated.  So we are writing a traditional.  synthesis by integrating various research papers and articles on algorithmic bias, which has better health care and science, and we also will present our interpret rotations of it and.  In addition to care will be exploring how bias effects or gender races and everything, and so the focus audience for this.  project will be scientists and industries and organizations that are involved in developing algorithms algorithms and policymakers and general public, thank you.  Do you guys have any questions.

**no speaker (00:24:26.700):** Let me say. Are you specifically looking to decipher.

**Meghana Saradchandra Peshwa (00:24:37.980):**  India India, but then there is also the class structure in Europe so maybe we look into that to have when you say castles also like the society like the social structure, yes.  You may know this, but is there are the data Center studies specifically focused on difference between tasks or things this is like one of our papers is like.  This one is a reimagining the full article is about.  The feet I go to 10 isn't in there, so we have not looked into it completely, but we did notice that there is a there is some bias going on.  I have no doubt that there is.  I just wonder how well it does it's not bad well studied I can look into it.  Would you started, that is cast play a demographic thing that people on forums, yes, we don't have like or is it was ovation system when you fly to universities and colleges so like how we as easy as possible.  Just i'm just curious, is it kind of like something that looks like from the fashion, where, if a certain cast it's like discriminate against historically would be, but it was people like that cast.  Oh yeah that is a formative action, but then I don't think so, it is, which is better algorithmic bias, because it's kind of algorithms are like kind of like over the past the past two or three decades I don't think, so there is enough interaction with respect to that.  So, in that sense the past is a variable just like race here, yes it's a box that people chair, yes, so you've been very if the data are available.

**no speaker (00:26:36.780):** Very well do that sort of analysis that.

**Meghana Saradchandra Peshwa (00:26:45.570):**  questions.

**no speaker (00:27:07.830):** is an option refining their emotional wellness also.

**Meghana Saradchandra Peshwa (00:27:17.730):**  Like.  mean that data is collected from different costs so something.  Like there is a initially what happens is that when we read this article.  Mostly data comes from hospitals which are like who are which are capable of doing research and most of them.  Like most of those people who visit those hospitals are going to be from the upper password from different societies so like mostly the people from the.  low cost, who are not effluent will be their data is not going to be recorded in hospital, so I think that is mad the biases operating in India.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:28:46.440):**  Okay, can people hear me.  Hello.  hi this for myself.  So everybody for my final project, I wanted to understand how clinicians view the concept of structural racism to do that I analyzed comments that were left in response to a case study published in the New England Journal of medicine stay with me it gets interesting.  Can I advanced Muslims yeah alright so by doing a content analysis of these comments I wanted to understand what kind of themes were common among the comments.  Because there's a lot of reluctance among physicians to really accept this idea of structural racism, at least in this subset of comments.  I use these comments and the themes that I identified within them to drive my literature search and from this literature search I proposed solutions to increase buy in from clinicians.  And so I had originally read this case for another course I knew I wanted to come back to it it's titled structural racism a six year old women black women with breast cancer.  The case follows the story of Mrs m was a black woman living in the south side of Chicago she experienced a series of substandard care and Miss diagnosis of what turned out to be breast cancer.  The authors of this case, though, take a neighborhood level approach they tell us that most of the hospitals in the Chicago southside, which is the majority black neighborhood.  weren't actually certified to provide the kind of care that Mrs needed, even though she went to the hospital she wasn't able to get the care that you need to diagnose and treat her breast cancer.  The others tell us that this is because of structural racism and they propose solutions, mostly at the Community and organizational levels to actually address this problem.  However, being a case on the New England journal medicine website, people are allowed to leave comments, and these are subset of the seven comments that I had identified.  Most of them are left by people who identify themselves as physicians.  And as you can see a lot of them were very negative, you know, ranging from skepticism over whether or not this was due to structural racism.  outright hostility towards the authors for implying that racism was even at play here and and I wanted to understand.  Were there any common themes among these comments Is there something that I can address and and Why are these people responding in this way.  And so to do that I conducted a content analysis, where I identified meaning units or codes within the comments common.  Words and comments that popped up over time and I was able to organize those common units into themes.  I had used the seems to understand what was driving the comments were there any common threads and I use them to conduct the literature search.  These are the four main themes that I had identified in my comments The first was that there is an acceptance that there was struck.  inequities to access to care at play in this case, but there's questioning over whether or not structural racism had anything to do with that.  Of course, I found that interesting because we all know that structural racism leads to inequities and access to resources That to me is a no brainer.  So it was interesting to see a lot of what I would consider well educated people not want to make that connection.  There is also a question over whose responsibility it is to address these disparities.  Was it the physician or the hospital's responsibility to narrow this gap, or was it the patient's responsibility to take a more active approach and her care.  One of the comments and something to the effect of my hospital is willing and able to provide high quality care for patients, like this is them, but people like her don't show up for her appointments.  This is striking to me, and not only because the physician was blaming the patient, in this case for her misdiagnosis but because the authors of this case said that most of the hospitals in this neighborhood weren't able to provide the care that she needed.  There were also calls for more research on the topic to me they didn't feel like good faith, you know, we need to get to the bottom of this solve this issue like let's learn more.  It was more so, asking the authors to make sure that they're correct in understanding that this is structural racism and they're not just accusing people of being racist.  And so the final theme which I would argue drove this whole you know these other three themes.  is just a discomfort with the idea of structural racism opposition like a gut reaction to be opposed to the idea of structural racism being at play here.  And so once I took these themes, I did my literature search I turned to pubmed and Google scholar and identified what I would consider four key papers.  One that addressed each of those themes I use these papers to kind of again address some of the concerns within the comments and maybe understand how I can get to these physicians.  And the first is titled how structural racism marks racist policies as a root cause of US racial health inequities.  This is a helpful paper because it does you know it answers a question, you know structural racism.  inequities and access to care by saying yes, it does it gives a good overview of what structural racism is.  That draws a very clear line between historically racist policies like segregation and red lighting to neighborhood level effects to disproportionate outcomes and say asthma morbidity.  And the second piece structural racism in historic and modern us healthcare policy was more focused on this question of whose responsibility is it to address these health disparities.  It talks about policies that impact access to care things like medicaid reimbursements disproportionate share hospital payments things that affect.  The ability of people of color to access care and it kind of gives this idea that, while the care technically exists right like there is a hospital somewhere that can treat this patient.  she's just not able to access it either due to reasons of affordability or geographic location, etc, like there's a whole constellation of factors that impact the ability to access care.  None of which have any of you know, are any of her fault right and this third piece was titled racism and health evidence and needed research.  It was a very good review, coincidentally came out of then like two weeks of the original case being published, and it was very helpful.  Because it gave a very good overview of what the status of the literature and looked like about structural racism and health.  It showed us that the authors had a lot of evidence to make their claims that structural racism leads to health outcomes authors of this case.  Where it coming out of left field with their conclusions and also talked about areas where more research was needed in the field i'm saying that we don't know everything we still need to look.  For different ways that structural racism impacts, health, one of the concerns that the authors had is that most of the research in this field.  Use segregation as a proxy for structural racism and they said that there are a few other factors that could be looked at and we need to continue to look at them.  The final piece was a podcast transcript from Gemma and it's titled structural racism for doctors, what is it and you might remember the controversy that this podcast.  created, it was early on last year in it, Dr ED livingston, who was the deputy editor for clinical content Gemma.  discussed at length about how he doesn't like the term structural racism, he thinks it's offensive because he doesn't see himself as racist, but he you know.  he feels that though he's being accused of being racist when people talk about structural racism.  And he said that we wanted, he just wants to focus on inequities and access to resources and to leave the response out of that.  This guy Howard doctor, which was the chief editor in chief a Gemma fired you know because of this podcast and I found this interesting.  Because I think it really mirrored some of the sentiment that was in the other comments that I was looking at in this case.  You know I kind of gave this context to why people are are pushing back at this idea of structural racism, the reason why.  People are questioning it asking the others to like make sure they're really they really got their stuff down before they accuse people of engaging in structural racism.  Even though the nature of structural racism is that it's not individually media racism right like I think there's just this miss understanding of what the term is.  And so to try to increase by in among physicians I realized that we just need to talk to them more.  To to increase education like I get there's going to be pushed back, like, I understand that there are people that are always going to be opposed to this, but I think that a lot of the.  knee jerk reaction that I saw in these comments was due to people who thought that they were being accused of being racist.  So you know, we need to overhaul both medical school curricula and things like you know what is talked about in Case studies like this.  But also continuing education requirements, I wasn't able to see the age of these commenters you know.  But i'm going to assume that they're not young men students that are saying we need to you know, like make sure that you've got your stuff down before we talk about structural racism right like I think these are older people.  Who really haven't been exposed to this sort of thinking or discussion before and so continuing education requirements things that you need to do to.  Keep your license as a doctor need to include content like this and it can't just be something that's siloed into its own unit it can't be something that's pushed to the side.  You know we're going to talk about racism for three hours and then we're going to be good and we're going to meet back up again in five years, and do it again, it needs to be cases like this discussing how it presents itself in oncology and cardiology in pediatrics.  for lack of a better term it just needs to saturate these physicians like thinking and understanding of how it presents itself, otherwise I don't know if we're going to get there.  And to that end, we need to highlight and fund more research, we need more cases like this to be at the top page of gamma and the New England journal medicine.  Both to to just show people that exists to legitimize the argument, but to support researchers area, you know in areas of more research or areas where more research is needed and.  You know I think it's just needs to be a continued effort, and when I had started looking at this paper, I thought I was mostly going to be talking to physicians I thought you know these are the people that are having these one on one conversations with patients.  They are the ones that get to decide who gets what care right.  But then I realized okay well if we need to overhaul education, I need to get educators on board, I need to make sure that the people that are shaping the curricula in MED schools and continuing education requirements.  are on board with this way of thinking.  And I also think that we need to get organizational leaders hospital administrators on board those are the people that decide how their organization interact with the Community that they serve.  And if they want to say that their organization truly serves the Community that they're situated in.  They need to make sure that their physicians are engaging and anti racist training, they need to make sure that they are doing things to reduce structural racism this can't just be something that's an admission statement on their website.  i'm going to i'm going to stop talking now, so you can see that i'm excited about this, but if you have any questions about my background research methods i'd be more than happy to talk about it, so thank you.

**no speaker (00:39:18.360):** Any questions yeah What did you see.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:39:21.750):**  So I can actually show you the process.  So these are the comments right, and I can kind of see them.  i'm really we just talked about this framework, and one of my other classes, but you go through, and you highlight different codes like So those are similar it says like playing the race card and the other one says, I hear Caucasian guilt.  And then you highlight other things that are similar this is talking about whose responsibility is it's the providers responsibility.  We talk about patient responsibility and we talk about you know calling from our research and then you go through, and you.  Okay Well, this is called from our research, this is political, this is provider accountability and that's patient responsibility, and so it just follows this.  This framework where you're starting at the bottom from like.  The actual sentence, you know, so this one's talking about like feeling abandoned in an er right and so you're saying well they pushed me to the middle of the room and they walked away and then you.  condense that and then you code that as like well person's like the law.  And then you say staff actions, because staff are leaving them alone until you just kind of move up and you condense these things I knew there's a bit of subjectivity to it.  There are other types of analyses, where you will just count the number of words that are present, you know, but I wanted to understand what people were saying, and these things are just explicitly stated.  there's also software yeah no I mean there were there were like seven comments, so they were only like maybe five pages, so I was just highlighting stuff yeah it's fun.

**no speaker (00:40:48.900):** You know.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:40:50.670):**  There are seven comments yeah there weren't a lot and so obviously this is a self selected like the people that are in support around different aren't going to comment but I figured there's not.  much opportunity for trolling because people have to leave their full name and like where they work and stuff on the comments so you're not going to say anything that's going to get you into much trouble.  yeah it's also the New England journal medicine, so I don't know how many people read stuff on a daily basis.  yeah exactly I mean it and I loved on berwick he's my favorite person.  You know, it is it's it's we get what like it's kind of like algorithms right like you get what you put into it.  And that's when I said, like if organizations, want to do this, like there are organizations that probably don't want to serve the Community like they don't all want to be be mcs right like I think about hospitals like.  You know, last gen I guess you could say where they were, I mean they have like VIP wings were like the really nice people that are going to care and so.  You know it's up to what you want to get out of it, and I think part of it is just like asking people what they really want to do and how they really want to serve people.  Thank you all right.  Any other questions.  All right, i'll sit down, thank you.

**Komal Wasif (00:42:50.400):**  Can everybody hear me.  Yes, okay okay awesome.  So the title of my project is, although we look different we are really the same.  OK, so the same enough topic is to discuss the misuse of science to justify racial discrimination, its influence on racial segregation and the critical race theory in a civil manner for children, so, as you can probably tell I wrote a children's book that was my statement or project format.  Okay, so why this topic Why did I choose this topic so a lot of times we hear children Act, the way they seen their surroundings.  So I think it's really important to acknowledge your surroundings and recognize that they may be showing racial disparities.  Also to shed light on racist research, I was meant to justify racial discrimination, especially against black people.  And how such research negatively impact the society in terms of like racial segregation brown versus board, etc.  Also, to give children a chance for someone to acknowledge and explain the racial disparities me see on a daily basis.  And to share some positive light on how the view of black people changing and remind children should treat everyone kindly if regardless of race, gender, etc.  And then, overall, the important topics, who knowledge, a society is going to acknowledge racial disparities and are working towards racial justice so it's kind of just to.  raise awareness, for children to kind of recognize what they're seeing and give some evolution to it.  So the main article you guys might be familiar with this, the main article is emotional factors and Rachel identification and preference and black children by can it be Clark, and maybe P Clark.  So the main idea was in the 1940s, I call psychologists kenton Mimi Clark design and conducted a series of.  Experiments known globally as a doll test to study the psychological effect of segregation on African American children.  Dr Clark use photos identical except for color to tell children racial perceptions.  So my synthesis of this article is that while decades half past this feeling of his lesson is still relevant highly in today's society, especially for black children.  And this feeling needs to be addressed so black black black children can understand how the critical race theory the mysteries of science just racism.  And all that advances these feelings, but these are just feelings they're not scientific facts.  And all people regardless of race, religion, physical characteristics etc are equal to monitor, so it is to acknowledge your feelings of course there is racism side is not like even a question, but a student knows that.  This is because of feelings and emotions people think it's not because of actual scientific facts are differences in race in terms of like physical characteristics and stuff like that.  So this is like you guys have probably seen this video many times during classes so i'm just gonna show a one minute video.  Once Second, I think I need to.  um can you if i'm playing the video, can you hear it is flexible.  They can they can hear okay all right.  All is the black dog.  Which one is the white dog.  Which.  Is the pretty.  Which is the lifestyle.  Which is the bad.  The bad.  Pretty.  ugly.  Which door looks most like you.  said.  OK, so my framework question was have or could any specific groups of people benefit or be harmed by the ideas or claims in the text If yes, who and how so my short answer is yes, black people can be harmed by.  The ideology behind that article so i'm only going to talk about a few sources I synthesize and on all of them, because I want to get some my book.  So one of them is all brains are the same color by in New York Times article, so the main idea of the article was that.  They discussed how Dr James Watson research research research says that there is a genetic difference between blacks and whites that condemns blacks into propensity to be less intelligent.  The author discusses this is wrong and sighs many other relevant scientific articles to prove that Dr James Watson was wrong.  My synthesis is this ancient inaccurate belief has leaked into our society and influenced so many things such as racial segregation and feelings of inferiority in black children.  My other article was systemic inequality how America structural racism help create the black white wealth gap, so this is more of an economic article.  But it mainly discussed already large what God racial gap between white and black American households that group, right after the great recession and targeted policies that are necessary.  To reverse this deepening divide, so this wealth gap and so many other racial disparities have influenced and change the way people can live and these disparities, need to be addressed in order to have equity kind of the whole critical race theory.  Okay um so my main thesis was that the research meant to justify racial discrimination scientifically wrong and i'll do some research influencers segregation and racial disparities.  As it becomes more knowledgeable about this misinformation things are slowly but surely changing for the better.  My ultimate target audience was everyone but technically children specifically i've i've initiated for a few years so i've taught children discuss outside topics, you know precisely.  subjects in school and I kind of just seen like how they view the world really differently than we do we kind of.  take for granted some bridges for us like we kind of acknowledging this move on with our lives, but they like notice like, why is this person having to deal with that, but.  The other person doesn't so children really do see a lot so that's kind of why I wanted to target audience okay my citations so i'm going to read my book i'm just thinking it's my first children's book so it's not gonna be so great.  And so the title is, although we look different we're really the same so for ages six and older.  a long, long time ago, go in the early 1800s some scientists like Dr James Watson have said Fuck it will have different brain says it's an invite people, but this is not true.  But people did not understand that, then, and these have to research cause racial segregation, the same thing activists like Martin Luther King jr Rosa parks will work to end.  Some people still think black people are less than other races again, this is not true research shows that there are so many things that influenced the way black people live their lives.  But people tend to have lower incomes live in neighborhoods near dangerous factories.  don't get a lot of resources in their school don't have access to food and so many more problems these problems don't allow black children to reach their full potential.  But don't worry things are changing, and people are starting to treat the black people better new scientists like Dr Eric her primary are publishing research that shows black for equal to other races in all aspects, including brain size and abilities.  If you're ever mistreated because of your race, you should always stand up for yourself in a polite manner, because at the end of the day, although we look different we are really the same.  Any questions.  Thank you.

**no speaker (00:51:09.690):** amazing I said. At the beginning, you said. No used to be there's less and less pressure that. Or the belief that you know what before. And that all that he recently left his feelings.

**Komal Wasif (00:51:31.140):**  And I never really thought about that, but that's that's exactly where it comes from, there is now like less than less evidence yeah to actually justify that, but the reason why is persistence, because feelings which is really interesting and difficult to counter act right does that.  change your feeling on something like anyone in this room who feels that way came.

**no speaker (00:51:55.980):** In touch like.

**Komal Wasif (00:51:58.650):**  you're feeling their feelings and their view does, they can change, and you can do things that might need to change the feelings.  But it's not a guarantee so i've been just like with amanda's that's probably they will factor, there is that we just have these deeper good feelings and emotions associated with it.

**no speaker (00:52:18.720):** Until you mentioned that it has really. hurt me that that's exactly what the challenges. are wonderful.

**Anya Gupta (00:52:59.730):**  Can everyone hear me.  awesome.  OK, so my project is about overcoming bias and medical education so a little bit what amanda was talking about to about the very kind of rudimentary level on how can we.  kind of implement change in medical schools to overcome the bias that we see in all of the health disparities that we've been talking about in this class.  So just as a general topic statement the medical establishment has obviously played a role in biology rising race.  As racial health disparities persist it's really important that medical education evolves to combat these harmful racist practices.  So some of the questions that i'm trying to probe are what are the current recommendations for medical schools what current practices are being implemented in medical schools to overcome these issues.  So the reason for interest i'm applying to Medical School, so I am curious what schools have done.  Or can do to close these disparities and it will obviously be a factor in where I apply if certain schools are just not even interested in addressing these questions wouldn't want to go there.  So for the project format i'm going to do a video of a PowerPoint presentation so i'll just tweak this presentation, a lot and then present the recommendations, the current practices and then report it kind of adds a presentation format.  Okay, so I have quite a few different sources I bolted, like the actual source so some of them are like journals of medical education.  One of them is white coats for black lives, the I guess it's a nonprofit organization that was founded about four years ago, and then also the last one is an article from outside eyes health system.  Just a new project that they were trying to do all of the sources that you would notice like are really recent and I noticed that, with everyone else's sources as well, which is just really interesting to see how.  There really hasn't been a big push for change, except for in the past five six years.  So my thesis after I went through these sources is that medical schools currently lack and having an Anti racist curriculum overall.  Several educators continually describe race as being biological or as being a risk factor for disease, the audience of this presentation is really medical Medical School applicants or curriculum developers or just people interested in education or medical education.  So I won't present all of my findings, but I did want to present this this background information.  So the US office of minority health was established in 1986 and in 2000 they published the national standards for culturally and linguistically appropriate services.  As like a blueprint to help healthcare workers and organizations better serve patients of all cultural backgrounds so obviously you would think this is great like there's this big document that will help people.  better serve patients, and that was 22 years ago, but still in 2018 only 40% of medical schools actually recorded teaching about racial disparities.  Less than half of the medical schools in this country and then one medical student on columbia's public health website posted this she had like a.  An op ED kind of piece, and I pulled this quote, that I thought was interesting.  She says that health disparity curricula place the blame on the population, reinforcing the racist system.  By pathology marginalized communities, so what I interpreted this to say is that you can teach health disparities, all you want, but if you're teaching it in the way that.  Still pathologies is race and saying these disparities exist because there are differences between races, then you're just reinforcing the racist system that's already in place.  So I really liked that quote and that made me think a little bit differently about medical school curricula because it's one thing to teach social determinants of health and another to kind of teach the history of racism and science.  So those were kind of recommendations I saw and then I did just want to present two main challenges to actually implementing some of these changes in curricula.  One is that really few studies have been done to assess the effectiveness of any of this cultural competence teaching part of that is due to the fact that all of these articles.  On like recommendations for education have only come out in the past five years, if you implement it, five years ago, those students who are actually learning that curricula, our first year resident now.  So there just hasn't been enough time to see the effect of implementing either like anti racist training or cultural competence training.  it's also hard to incorporate more training into an already crowded medical school curricula, a lot of MED students have crossover summer as well, so it's just a really talked for years, so people like us, are struggling to incorporate.  Something that is really important, but that's just a challenge that has has been present and see what else.  yeah I think that's all I want to present, for now, because the rest will be in my final project um but yeah overall, I thought it was interesting kind of like it was a downer reading about how few medical schools are actually like doing something about it but yeah I thought was interesting.  questions.  Oh, is cultural institution effectiveness assessed.  And they'll do like kind of pre and post surveys.  I saw one of the recommendations was.  After educators are trained in cultural competence their students should evaluate them.  yeah so just a lot of like evaluation, I guess, by like surveys.  test knowledge yeah like knowledge and cultural competency as well.  We actually have this discussion a lot in regards to this class like.  How do we do a pre post of all of us when we try to measure success and.  Like my first thought when I saw that bullet was like well how would you assess the effectiveness of photocopiers teaching well like 510 years down the line and despair health disparities are less right on that one the size of that.  One thing like maybe like institutions that have.

**no speaker (00:59:51.480):** certain conditions. yeah.

**Anya Gupta (00:59:57.420):**  Right.  yeah interesting.  Well, assuming those metrics are published as soon as they are as an American hospital minefields we're lucky to have those all those but I mean.  they're sort of like your public private institutions are there are to do certain things.  When we say integration on that, like the part of it that's part of what was hard to find is just a lot of schools weren't publishing different things.  yeah he asked a good question like what would I recommend I guess yeah definitely like workshops aren't enough it shouldn't just be like one unit of the curriculum, the history of racism and health care rather even just things like.  In like clinical training, making sure that you're that you have a well represented patient population that you're not like learning or testing specifically on Black patients are like disproportionately testing on certain populations.  are also just removing the root race as a risk risk factor for disease, especially without talking about the historical context i'm like I think a lot of schools still teach that being black is a risk factor for sickle cell disease as we've talked about as well.  yeah me.  So do you think it could be possible, that they should have meetings acquire this training prior to going to school, just like.  Kleenex because, like, of course, that like, such as the one we're taking right now I think it's definitely like give me more information on something that I was aware of and going into Medical School like it is very important for people to be aware, but not many pre MED students are.  So do you think possibly require it that way, so it's really interesting yeah they should definitely still have it in medical school and I know that for us like.  They recommend as a pre REG like sociology psychology that kind of thing and sociology maybe very briefly touches on racism, but I think having probably not a lot of undergrad institution taught a class like this anyway um, but I think if more deem it would be like a good elective to.  To either like at the very least recommend to my students to take.  These are.

**no speaker (01:02:37.830):** All accountable will continue.

**Anya Gupta (01:02:42.870):**  To have.  i'm not sure enough to.  i've seen I saw an article recently about like 10 law and, like some law professor incorporating like racist practices into her classes, I haven't really seen that with any.  Like Medical School professors, but yeah that's interesting like those kind of institutions not like you don't get much like.  kind of like your percent and the perception of other.

**no speaker (01:03:17.790):** Things. people's.

**Anya Gupta (01:03:27.990):**  yeah absolutely on there so white coats for black lives they do a racial justice report card every year.  And I analyze that and some of these top schools that we know what completely failed across all of their measures of addressing racial disparities, so I thought that was really telling when I was in high school years ago article that talked about Harvard was a really hot topic.  From where it was.  yeah I didn't really look at admissions but I looked more like curriculum specifically but yeah.  Like a springboard is that all did it.  Every week.  love to follow.  up like a were you guys able to find like if there were any ones that we're actively trying to control, whether or not that was actually.  Like um yeah again I don't know about like long term just because any of these practices have only been in the past five years tufts did really, really well on the racial justice report card.  Part of it and I hadn't thought of this before, so if medical schools have to hold student run free clinics, that means that their primary teaching hospital isn't providing all of the resources.  For the local population so like test for example they're able to meet all of the needs of the local population, they also have some sort of practice that.  Students of color if the content is like really emotional or like they've kind of had lived experience in that content they don't have they can be excused from certain lessons so, but so is there, like a.  trend or similarity between schools that are doing, those that are failing schools that are trying to implement It just seems like very few schools are but, again, like that that it was really hard to find a little.

**no speaker (01:05:24.330):** bit. Better.

**Anya Gupta (01:05:27.510):**  yeah there's a lot of discussion about it but yeah like putting together a list of.  Or at least incorporating awareness of the.  Things that are no other people who are concerned.  I wonder if they as they may be, schools, already doing it, but they may not be publicized right.  I thought the comment about capabilities.  Because it's really easy for institution to point the bad actors, like all this question is phrased it started whatever.  Whereas the structural aspects that are imbued with that the entire institution are probably much harder or the institution's themselves to acknowledge, you need identify.  So accountability accountability is really interesting have you won't be an institution responsible or structural racism and I don't know if that's not really part but it's easy to fire someone and then do something doctors.  relativity.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (01:07:23.400):**  Can you hear me.  No wait for it thumbs up awesome Okay, so I will be presenting my project on analyzing and address addressing racial and ethnic disparities in asthma rates.  So.  So, to give a brief overview i'll do an introduction details and then.  goals of my project.  So, to give just a brief overview of asthma, it is a chronic condition that affects the lungs Airways and disproportionately affects children.  Some other risk factors include air pollution, which really is the environment in which a person is living in family history allergies.  And viral respiratory infections currently the national rates of asthma that 5 million Americans have asthma currently and about 10 Americans dive asthma on a daily basis.  And what i'll be focusing my project on is a disruption as a rates among racial and ethnic.  Ethnic minorities, so to go into the disparity Puerto Rican suffer the highest as surveillance rates currently.  Black Americans are five times more likely to visit the emergency department due to asthma and they're also three times more likely to die from asthma, which is a really stark difference from the rates that I was previously mentioning.  And what i'll be really analyzing in my project is the country what the contributing factors are to the disparity.  So generally tends to be lack of quality healthcare lack of education among this racial and ethnic minorities and lack of quality housing due to many racial and ethnic minorities.  composing a large proportion of lower socio economic status and being exposed to a lot of environmental risk factors, due to the quality of housing.  And the reason why I chose this topic is because I do have a really.  Big passion for health equity and i'm an aspiring position researcher similar to anya was mentioning i'll be applying to Medical School next year.  And I have worked a lot on racial health disparity work outside of school, so I wanted to go into a different topic that I haven't really explored before.  I explored, a lot of diabetes, especially within Hispanic population so wanting to go into asthma, because I do also have an interest in working with children, and since this affects children a lot.  was interested in that and also, I do come from an underrepresented minority background so i'm really big on wanting to advocate for my community and issue health issues that affect my community.  How I decided to do my project was to do a traditional research paper, so I wanted to do extensive research on the topic and I thought that the traditional research paper would encapsulate that.  However, at the same time, I think that a lot of health equity work.  tends to be really descriptive of health disparities and like to statistics and kind of lacks in the side with tangible solutions that can be taken to address those health disparities.  So I decided to do an infographic as well on tangible solutions that can be taken by healthcare providers to address the disparity, based on the research that I did.  And if you go into the details, these are some of the main sources that I use, there are a lot more, but these are the ones that I mostly synthesized and there are mostly academic journals.  And they range from around like the early 2000s to the being published in the past two years, so it really has been an issue that has been studied, for a long period of time, which is what I noticed.  So i'll be synthesizing from beast and then to go.  into my goals, my main thesis is that there are various sources that have confirmed that these three factors that I mentioned earlier, lack of quality lack of quality healthcare lack of education and housing quality.  proposed by one of the sources that I had mentioned earlier, reinforced existing historical associate economic and political power structures.  That have loved a detrimental impact on the as the rates among racial minority groups, and there are various tangible steps healthcare providers can take out the micro meza macro levels to address this racial health disparity.  So the traditional research paper, the target audience is generally the general public, it does provide extensive background information on asthma and.  goes in depth analysis of the different contributing factors, however, I think.  Where where would be I think people who are interested in health care be interested in the topic.  And then the infographic like I mentioned, would be the general audience would be health care providers as it is tangible solutions that that can be taken to address it to this to address this disparity.  And how my paper will be outlined is as since my thesis is.  analyzing these three contributing factors to the disparity i'll the mapping them on to what what political what power structure, they map onto.  And they reinforce so like for lack of quality health care or be arguing that there is a political socio economic structure that is influencing that contributing factor.  For lack of as an education tends to be associated knowledge structure and then lack of quality housing really reflects both of those as well, so really mapping on how different sources support the argument of these contributing factors reinforcing these power structures.  And the parts to the paper is the tangible solutions that healthcare providers can be taking.  So just kind of to like had mentioned earlier, to provide those tangible steps that can be taken, instead of just kind of listening, what is happening, the statistics and kind of that's it kind of having some intervention in in there is what I strive to achieve there.  So what my infographic will be composed of this is like a first draft so micro level actions of how healthcare provide healthcare providers can be improving interactions.  With racial minority groups and if they know that there is a lack of education kind of being really intentional of working with families to have those conversations.  and also to practice cultural humility, so I think that that's something really important because it's being really reflecting reflective on your own culture, but also.  committing to a lifelong process of under wanting to learn about someone else's culture in your patients culture so that's something i'm a big advocate for, and I will be talking about in my paper.  And then, more meza level actions so actually can be taking at a neighborhood level organizational level and your little community.  That can be working with local environmental organizations to reduce pollution in areas that disruption are low socio economic status because, as we know, like East Boston right next to like a lot of factories, a lot of pollution.  So something that providers can be doing outside of the clinic room and then also.  physicians can be can be promoting the implementation of cultural humility programs within their local hospitals.  I think that cultural humility is important because cultural competence, can you can never really be competent in someone else's culture, so I think that's why I really like close your abilities like just wanting to learn always throughout your whole life.  And then those more macro level actions so kind of more policy level increasing civic participation, first of all physicians before the 2018 and 2020 election actually physicians.  voted less than the general public, so that's something that I wanted to address in my paper.  And then also promote the implementation of underrepresented minority pipeline programs, as I actually research within my paper is that patients who have physicians that are are that are of the same racial ethnic background.  Report higher satisfaction rates so can be more receptive to education, as provided by a physician and just overall improve education and receptiveness so just some actions that i'll be discussed and yeah I think that's what I have as of right now does anyone have any questions.  In.  Each one of these bullets to the radical.  Do you have any plan for like breaking out each individual bullet, to say what are some things that you could do for each of them so like you've listed a number of things for increasing so.  What we would want right that sort of.  A so I wanted to reduce as much like a guess words on it, but I think that is a good piece of feedback of like how you can go about doing that in terms of like.  hat like obviously that one one big barrier that physicians list is like.  If a resident they have like a 24 hour call like election day and it's like that's very difficult to go out and vote, so I guess the I think that's a good piece of feedback that I could list some ways of Polish level changes that could increase that.

**no speaker (01:16:10.320):** I can see that there's.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (01:16:14.820):**  Okay, I have a couple questions here where Am I usually infographic I know it's not a requirement but question.  that's a good question, I think I wasn't thinking about where it can be published, I guess, but I mean I guess social media could be like an easy way of just kind of disseminating information like an infographic.  i've seen that a lot, I think we saw that, especially during like summer of 2020 there was a lot of infographics kind of circulating social media so couldn't be an auction and then press conference said what role of chronic stress have on the.  On the incidence of asthma and bond people um I didn't actually look look into that specifically However I would believe if there's a lot of what I was mostly looking was like environmental.  But I think that would definitely be as we learned about the anesthetic load that can be something that can affect as a race, just as much.  I was thinking about my son's future yeah I think that'd be great I can pass it on.

**no speaker (01:17:14.970):** Like. you're reading a paper as well.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (01:17:19.590):**  yeah.  Instead of papers, making a website.  I could have saved, though, however yeah that could be an option or really easy I was just thinking like each one of these bullets, you can put like a little qr codes to that section of the website that they.  might not be for you, which is a different format same workers, putting out okay yeah I can look into new.  I know there are platforms out there that's trivial.

**no speaker (01:17:53.880):** websites.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (01:17:59.940):**  it's so easy for you guys as much as you want, but there's also think about it, like kind of template so that it's easier for you to do it sounds good yeah definitely.  yeah.  Sure, thank you.

**Abdul A (01:19:46.860):**  Well, first i'll start off just defining on healthcare price transparency so it's when basically the same services so to multiple consumers different consumers at varian prices.  And there's a large degree of you know, price variation on across different hospitals for different people.  And when you look at the quality and there's not a lot of correlation it's all over the place between the price and quality.  And for most commodities on pricing is usually turn on supply and demand model, but I noticed, for you know hospital visits and healthcare it's completely different on different world.  And, unlike other commodities peers and consumers of healthcare usually for know far less than the seller, and in this case the seller would be the physician was a financial interest in the outcome, so I thought that was pretty interesting.  And the physicians also the one who will you know advise the patient on what's the best treatment and usually the patient doesn't have any medical knowledge at all so they'll just listen to whatever the physician tells them.  which I thought was you know very alarming and this price failure on results from you know prices being too high, and this actually impacts, the US healthcare system.  Overall, on a macro scale arm and it leads to you know a lot of waste, you know which I think is another reason to look at this as well.  and consumers are you know increasingly over the last couple of years, based on my research being the ones who have to.  account for the burden of this waste and medical premiums are increasing, and this actually results in higher deductibles for plans.  And some low and middle income settings larger of healthcare organizations in the private healthcare sector which can range from you know unregulated pharmacies to tertiary.  Care hospitals and when prices in premiums on affordable for most people on the private sector does that contribute to.  The improving population health, which is commensurate with the share of resources so he's receiving more of the money going to the private health and the private health is more expensive, so this actually creates a very bad cycle um.  so next time we're just looking at some solutions that's already out there, so, first of all, what are the problems we're looking at, and these are the two primary problems.  um to slow the growth of healthcare spending the access of healthcare spending and also to you know, promote more consumer sovereignty in this case, the consumer is going to be the patient.  And there has been, you know some changes on so January 2019 there's a mandate, where you have to list the prices online and.  Also, like a couple months later on the President at the time trump signed in order proposing that you know insurance.  regulations that would require the providers to disclose the list of the prices.  and, additionally, more than half of states have passed, you know price transparency legislation so it's, not just on a federal level it's also on a state level arm.  And a number of insurance companies is self insured employers also offer their employees access to a price comparison tool, so you have the insurance now offering these tools, but I noticed.  there's not a lot of engagement with these tools on so there's no one, even though this is a solution it's not really helping the problem, the problem is still persistence, you know which is not good at all.  And there's different ways, you can categorize these price transparency tools tools provided by insurance companies to enrollees so you know.  I have examples for each one and a member pay estimator your commercial tools are purchased by self insured employers for use by insurance, please mandatory state government disclosure websites and the voluntary disclosure of by individual facilities, which is the last one home.  And in terms of this i'm somebody tools allow customers to also offer obtain personalized prices so it's like basically this price transparency tools on.  I kind of like when you go online shopping, so you can see different ones different prices on really know use your own judgment and what I noticed is.  Sometimes, when people do use these tools it doesn't really help you out a lot because you'll see a higher price, but you don't know why so some people.  coralie higher prices higher quality, so I think these tools are not perfect, either, so this could be the reason why there's not a lot of change just give you some background on the Info.  And this is more about the failure of the price transparency tools on and some explanations which i've cleaned out here which i'll talk more about in the format i'm doing a podcast.  On so like I said earlier, the physicians have a lot of influence, which I think is the biggest you know.  Failure on why because let's say there's a price transparency tool and your doctor is telling you.  Just forget about it, you know have this operation, most people go with a doctor's advice so sometimes you know we have to look at just the influence of the doctor versus a price transparency tool, so I think there should be more of.  A holistic, you know reasoning for this arm and a lot of these tools like I said earlier, poorly designed and customers find them difficult to use.  US and on consumers have sometimes met their insurance deductible and they're not directly responsible for various any treatment costs which.  is why you know, sometimes they don't really care about the price once you reach that goal and i'm here despite the growth and these tools on investments on it's unclear why this has not really helped lower the health care spending um.  And this is not just limited to just the United States on I have some research were like to have this in the United Kingdom and have it also in Australia and and also the Netherlands, so this is a global effort you know it's not just the domestic effort here United States.  And now I looked at all price transparency and its role in promoting health iniquity.  And I think this was a just looking at how can relate to the course it does and we talked about health iniquity a lot, so I think this is something that really excited access per se it's this issue.  And there's some data I looked at as well from one of my articles on I don't know three articles on and I looked at, basically, like the insurance and more than not 80% of white Americans were employed.  Cover employer medicare and I looked at also compare this to black Americans and Hispanics, which was the data and 62% 2%.  And i'll show you in the next slide on it actually shows you the breakdown, but you have a busy more than half our medicaid black and Hispanic Americans compared to white American so.  These hospitals are catering to individuals have private insurance and you're going to see a lot of individuals have private insurance are white Americans and they're the ones that are you know I guess being the preferred consumer for hospitals.  um yeah.  And i'm also I also want to talk about the shop level services with price traits rachel's are designed for shop level services which consumers are able to schedule in the receive care, and I think consumer interest in price.  shopping may be influenced by whether information about service quality available as well, so um it's it wasn't just a lot of things I looked at on.  And this is a graph I was talking about just showing you the health insurance coverage by race and ethnicity, and you can see, for medicaid 12% and 30%.  respectively for aesthetics and blacks on so i'll just give you a couple seconds to just digest this graph and just look at it on, you see, also on for private citizen 60% white American 43.7% for Hispanics and blacks as well on and I thought was interesting as well to look at the uninsured.  Because you know 5% of the shirts are white Americans book for Hispanics you're 18% and blacks and Asians not 10% so just seeing just a wide the difference, you know was interesting you know so a lot of people are not insured for Hispanics and blacks.  And it was also interesting to look at, just like the diversion hospital prices, based on coverage on and i've had example where I looked at hospital bill for a patient be treated for heart failure.  And there was different prices, so you can see that you know for someone who had medicaid um it was 10,700 on.  drop to 7500.  And it's 21,000 patients privately insured, so these hospitals have an incentive to you know, sometimes look at profits, so I thought that know for a lot of these hospitals you'll have.  People that need help and they're catering to this cause and getting more revenue and more money not that that was really causing a lot of issues because um when you have.  A system that's designed to help people, especially you know when they're very sick, it should not be about you know who has more money you know I thought that's something i'm definitely discuss my podcast for sure.  And i'm also I also with a medicaid hospital payments for the base rate and the fee rates and combine these payments reach 106% of medicare rates as a nation, on average, but the base fees only after 78% of medicare prices.  And if you look at the private insurance, it was 200% of medicare prices by 2017 and, if you look at them for outpatient hospital carries 300% of medicare rates.  And a lot of this power comes from the hospital, so they have a lot of different ways they can put spices, so when you hospitals have mergers to kind of you know monopolize their resources and there's less competition when there's less competition.  there's less variation of prices and there's also information as symmetry so this goes back to the position i'm telling their patients the best outcome, the best treatments.  and also the last part was on our taxpayer money so hospitals tilt tax expenditures towards facilities that treat private insurance patients so.  You have federal subsidies for these privately insured patients and now we're seeing.  A kind of like an equal rights and equal amount, so you have federal subsidies for hospital services for the private insurers are comparable to total spending and it will soon exceeded the trend continues on I think in my research was that by 2026.  So look back at that, but the main part is obviously you have taxpayer.  money being used to fuel the growth of his health iniquity and it goes back to my audience will talk i'll talk about the next couple slides.  Which are policymakers congress on the presidential administration, who can perhaps you know offer policy to stop this consider this deal with taxpayer money.  And this is a something that i'm going to talk about at length as well, and my podcast so you have Los Angeles in Manhattan and if you can see i'll give you a couple seconds to look at the graph.  Because the quality goes up you have less patients with medication that's what the y axis has no medicaid patients and then a.  year the y axis and X axis has the quality treatment so you'll see on the Cedars Sinai medical Center just one of the best in California Los Angeles it's.  hundred percent quality within 10% 20% medicaid patients and we see similar trend in you know Manhattan as well, so Los Angeles, a Manhattan um, so this is data that did support the fact that you know.  The people that have medicaid are going to know hospitals that have poor quality.  And you see that you know these hospitals that are no access to more to the right.  are taking patients who have private insurance.  And then we have another one here, this is a little bit more difference, but this is for Atlanta Georgia arm, and this is very interesting and I want to go and talk about this in my podcast as well just the regional regional variants.  In this data on and why it's different Ellen and on Houston compared to like Los Angeles in Manhattan so on that's something i'm going to talk about.  And then I looked at also some solutions, so there are few solutions to limit out of network prices um you could also place a cap on all hospital prices will carry over.  in or out of network, so the captain really help us all so there's no like excessive spending on, and it could also be a default contract, you know which specifies prices patient access and service levels which applies hospitals.  and also public option as well, which was in my research I think laws administrations have tried to do, but something that really can help as well.  And one thing that I also I didn't mention the slide is, it would be helpful to like.  get this information about the prices we walk into the hospital, but we visually walk in on because you know a lot of people that are waiting.  For the hospital lat long time so that while you're waiting actually like look at the prices, which I think helps and i'm just a bit different variances.  And this is essentially on my projects or record a podcast i'll look at this issue in depth analyze the problems and solutions to both healthcare price squirted.  Discrimination and transparency and how it makes help iniquity worse it'll be 10 minutes, but this is subject to change.  And i'll analyze these solutions, look at the price transportation tools on like I said earlier, look at how it's happening in America and also the Netherlands, Australia, the UK.  Most of the look at the different regions of America and see how the different laws effect this as well, and this goes back to like the earlier.  graph I showed you compare an Allen and Houston to Los Angeles and Manhattan and I also offer my personal thoughts and experiences on this issue.  Statement of topic is our healthcare price discrimination on transparency, introducing exacerbates all iniquity and wiser relevant on.  Healthcare price transparency variation is just a big waste of you know, money on in terms of the US healthcare system, it can definitely be modified.  offer the better on this will lead to even higher prices than less access to high quality treatment for many groups.  And there's also a lack of you know i've noticed, while studying like of commentary and research on specific how effects different races or price trends.  Parents and discrimination, so I think i'm just having this research will help with it's an area that needs more I guess contribution.  And i'm my audience is our policymakers or insurance companies, hospitals and, more importantly, our patients and patients are probably the most important audience with policymakers.  And now, this is the main article that I looked at on hospital practice creation is deeper racial health equity, this is for the best source, I found.  For the topic i'm looking at and it's where I got the knowledge graph as well on so i'll be looking at this on I also looked at some article from the World Health Organization and there's another one as well on and I found on this morning as well that might not.  And these are my references.  Yes, yeah.  What do you think the best.  People need to get care and so like maybe like like prices are for the end of the day, like if you're gonna need to get something done right with be.  celebrating the best way of addressing this whole situation is it just like informing.  me that.  um I think one thing that would help us like having more competitions hospitals on sometimes a lot of hospitals are monopolize.  So you have more competition on you'll have less people tend to have lower prices, so I just think competition would help as well, and also our physicians that are.  managing all of them do have positions that are cognizant of the price they see a procedure and usually let's say one is more expensive on there, but the same outcome may be looking at that so just the motivation position as well.  Is there anything that.  Remaining topics so.  Let me just answer this.  Yes, so there's also this precipice.  um.  yeah there is an influence and i'm just some people just I don't know why, but people think like something's more expensive it's better just goes outside of you know, hospitals, a lot of things that slightly or like that on, and I think also.  there's one in the chat it says um but there's also an inference that the price you paid is related to the quality of care, and that is not the case was the system designed to work this way, do you see do you foresee any pushback from so.  I, I think, honestly, the system could have been designed to work this way because i'm a lot of them I think healthcare.  Companies insurance companies, they all want to make money so when people just think something's more expensive it's better and there's no pushback on it they're gonna let it keep perpetuating um so that's just my opinion on it.  says.  Insurance and clearly.  um I haven't, but I have like personal experience of trying to go to the dental office and, like some stuff gets covered by insurance so like I was gonna mention that um.  Well, for my personal thoughts on the podcast which I think helps.  Years ago, I remember reading it was like an investigative journal story about essentially the the wildly different prices between the same service at different hospitals right one another and third they mentioned lots of reasons why that is but one of them is that hospitals.  I think most hospitals have to.  Accept patients like they can't deny care because of insurance status.  And so they hospitals basically have to assume they're operating a box.  and different hospitals like they have to figure out how to make up the difference, one way or another, and that this article tribute it, and that was one of the reasons why these are so different for different things, because every hospital, just like well after.  randomly allocate prices to different things to just take another thousand yeah.  that's a very, very complex thing seems to figure out palaces hospital for also like massive is a huge overhead costs lots of people facilities lots of.  And so.  That was a part of the article section.  It is i'm interested to know, like just see what you find you got all this research, because there's so many my mind boggling factors associated like.  At the end of the day, right like.  The quality better than.  The other thing that I thought about was.  Something that I learned in the Dean and healthcare lecture, which was the difference between rural hospitals see muscles, like, I wonder, and that sort of like an implicit like good advice, because all of the plots that you had websites.  and be happy nomics the hospitals and rural areas are just fundamentally different seats and so like there is no competition hospital close new territory for hospitals closing in rural areas, but it's not it's not.  So I wonder how that also intersects with what you were talking about here is a clock again i'll definitely look into that.  Any other questions.  Yes.  A lot of it was honestly um I didn't look at it deeply, but I believe it's because of socio economic issues um.  that's probably the biggest thing, because what socio economically on if you have private insurance, it means you make more money, you have a job.  Compared to like I said, like this certain recent is a lot of uninsured people, so I think has to do with a lot of them just listen on the problems.  that's a good question I have not looked at that, but i'm.  Either thanks.  Thank you.

**no speaker (01:42:37.350):** well.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:43:17.280):**  hey.

**Adam Labadorf (01:43:30.600):**  we're all aligned or not heard new stuff.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:43:36.000):**  I was wondering if you.

**Adam Labadorf (01:43:37.050):**  brought it up great it works really well.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:43:44.280):**  Really really well.

**Adam Labadorf (01:43:46.770):**  yeah i'm.  descended ended up not being necessary at all, which is good.

**no speaker (01:43:53.580):** Okay.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:43:57.390):**  that's cool.

**Adam Labadorf (01:43:58.470):**  I mean I don't know I guess what does that.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:44:01.740):**  mean it worked great for me, I could hear everybody and.  see everything and like yeah there's no hitches on my end for for doing all the feedbacks it was like being there again, I mean.

**Adam Labadorf (01:44:18.150):**  yeah was like.  we're all used to it now.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:44:23.400):**  I guess yeah so I was actually thinking of taking a behind the scenes photograph of like what all the setup is here because I like have my computer I have my iPad he Felix is in this like new baby swing thing I got him so that he could just like kind of chill.  Good.

**Adam Labadorf (01:44:47.580):**  awesome yeah i'm unfortunately like I actually have conflicts next week, so I can do it.

**no speaker (01:44:53.460):** Okay.

**Adam Labadorf (01:44:55.530):**  In mobile conflicts, but it sounds like fred's going to be be here and on it, we can work that out.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:45:00.930):**  Okay yeah.  I guess my question would be did any of the students see how you did everything.

**Adam Labadorf (01:45:11.880):**  I mean, I just have the plugged into the wall and and that's all we really need, I think.  You only new might since we won't have a because yeah I had this extra like external thing, so that I could be watching the screen, as well as some.  letting us.  do that.  But I don't think that's necessary You might ask students to turn on their camera when they're presenting so otherwise you wouldn't be able to see them at all, but that's I guess it's up to them yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:45:45.900):**  I mean in some in some respects that wasn't a huge deal because I was focused more on like the slides and things like that so.

**Adam Labadorf (01:45:55.080):**  cool a new a new use for zoom.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:45:59.160):**  yeah for real.

**Adam Labadorf (01:46:05.070):**  Alright cool.

**Felicity Crawford (01:46:07.350):**  RDS instance there are.

**Adam Labadorf (01:46:09.600):**  A couple of minutes master students are here Hello.

**Felicity Crawford (01:46:15.930):**  All right.  Talk to you all next time.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:46:19.440):**  yeah see you later felicity.

**no speaker (01:46:21.810):** I do.

**Felicity Crawford (01:46:23.520):**  I got to hear every one of them.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:46:26.520):**  yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (01:46:27.660):**  they're so good.  yeah.  Okay well we'll talk to you guys later.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:46:37.410):**  Okay bye.

