---
---

# Inclusion in Science/Critical Pedagogy

**Date:** 4/21/2022

**Amanda Katchmar (00:00:39.870):**  hello, how are you.  Oh, you know i've been better i've got a cold.

**Felicity Crawford (00:00:51.210):**  I hope you did you are you feeling all kinds of symptoms.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:00:56.820):**  Just mostly just a sore throat and congestion my boyfriend was sick and I was like you know it's crazy, I never get sick, as you do, you know, thinking that i'm not going to get what he has and obviously I did so.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:13.980):**  Things I hope it it's a it's only a cold.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:01:18.120):**  meteor I got tested yesterday and i'm not gonna so.  Oh good yeah.

**no speaker (00:01:24.330):** Good good yeah.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:01:27.540):**  So you back in Boston.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:29.790):**  Back yesterday, yes.  i'm going back again, then the 10th of me.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:01:36.540):**  Oh wow so soon.  that's good.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:41.310):**  Oh yeah I shuttle between the two places, sometimes I forget, where I am.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:01:47.070):**  Do you drive or do you.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:48.480):**  fly I fly.  yeah only because after get back to and fro in a hurry it's only an hour's flight so it's not quick flight.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:01:58.380):**  not bad yeah yeah no that's good.

**Felicity Crawford (00:02:02.940):**  So what kinds of food, do you like you.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:02:06.930):**  Think a question I think i'm open to anything.

**Felicity Crawford (00:02:09.450):**  No okay so so much to choose from.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:02:13.170):**  really go.

**Felicity Crawford (00:02:14.040):**  In and what do you like to do.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:02:15.990):**  yeah I know yeah I mean i'm looking forward to just trying new things.  When i'm down there.

**Felicity Crawford (00:02:24.120):**  shorted really check on DC.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:02:27.330):**  Oh well.

**Felicity Crawford (00:02:28.110):**  there's a grill there to the White House, that is.  That is sort of like the watering hole for a lot of folks who are on the CAP.

**no speaker (00:02:37.050):** You know at the Capitol.

**Felicity Crawford (00:02:39.330):**  You trying to remember the name of the grill it's been there forever and.  If I do i'll send you a text.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:02:45.660):**  Yes, please.

**Felicity Crawford (00:02:47.550):**  meet people people American.  Fear, so you know the words.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:02:53.190):**  The main thing yeah.

**Felicity Crawford (00:02:55.080):**  But if you make them.  make them whatever you like Indian food any time hi there's a lot, there are a lot of times is too long, so there's a lot to select from.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:03:07.140):**  yeah that's good i'm looking forward to the neighborhood that i'm in because i'm in.  Columbia heights and I guess there's a lot of like Hispanic food here by the woman that i'm reading from said, like oh you'll you know it's all Nice and cheap and good.  yeah.

**Felicity Crawford (00:03:24.180):**  Absolutely, Nice and cheap and good is great yes.  The grill I was telling you about it's not so cheap, but if you wanted to try, you know to see where the folks saying oh.  yeah article grill.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:03:38.010):**  Capital girl okay definitely.

**Felicity Crawford (00:03:41.520):**  it's kind of pricey though but.  You know it's a place to go watch for.

**no speaker (00:03:47.430):** yeah.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:03:49.290):**  that's part of the fun.

**no speaker (00:03:50.430):** yeah.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:03:57.630):**  hello, can you hear me.

**Felicity Crawford (00:03:58.920):**  Oh yeah we can hear you okay good.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:04:03.570):**  we're giving it one more minute and then we're about to get started.

**no speaker (00:04:06.420):** Okay.

**Felicity Crawford (00:04:08.460):**  See Jeff thanks I appreciate your saying yes.  I so appreciate it.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:04:14.490):**  always happy to hear more fun finance.

**Felicity Crawford (00:04:19.410):**  I think students should hear from sizes.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:04:52.200):**  Alright i'm going to get started.  I am not sure why it's.  Not coming up.  On the course site, as such, but it will be soon, so we are all the scroll and all the way down here on 24 you can get to it easy if you click on last week and then click on this next and it's embedded here there's all it's also just this link.  Which is a bit.  Ly.  flash ir hs and then El.  will give everybody a second to navigate there.  And I put everything we're going to need for today and for next week.  Next Tuesday on this document so you'll be able to live link everything from here.  When i'm having trouble getting to it once it opens up.

**no speaker (00:05:56.730):** You know.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:05:58.200):**  Go.  Alright, so I find it a little bit easier to go straight to the Google Doc so i'll work off the Google Doc.  and  So.  Last class, we were thinking about these topics with felicity and my name is tj McKenna i'm i'll say a little bit more about myself but i'm a science educator I do a lot around.  authenticity, how we bring authentic experiences into K 12 classrooms and oftentimes find it's actually like K 16 classrooms like a lot of people haven't really had.  True authentic science experiences and in college, unless you go into the lab or you start working with research team and so outside of that I do a lot of work with administrators and teachers nationally on actually internationally just did.  professional development program with an online Jordan, because they're huge fans.  Of.  The standards we're going to be talking about in this second new vision.  And, and so I travel around do a lot of work, trying to explain this new vision give give people a perspective and so.  What we're talking about today, and next Tuesday, are these three questions here is education is a tool that we can use against racism against these ideas.  And we're kind of shifting into the like Okay, so we got a lot of ideas i'm sure your head they're bouncing around with all of the things that they learned in this class like.  I like to shift thinking about like okay so we've noticed a bunch of things we understand, about two things now, what are we going to do about it, like what's the action with the verb.  So what about science communication is that and how might we use education, science communication similar or different ways, and so I.  policy together in person today we're going to be a little perspective, taking and we're actually going to engage we're going to do, science and talk about it and try it and see what we can figure out together.  And, and then we'll get I try and connect a resource, so that it'll give you a picture of what's happening, naturally.  With each, and so we may just do men like to do a lot of kind of big picture that zooming in and see what.  And, in essence, but I wanted you to have all of the links to these resources because you might find something and say like oh.  I never knew that X what's happening in schools, I love to know more about that, and then we can have conversations and so.  That we're excited about this vision, this new vision for keiko science, education and look at a couple of resources that come from this National Group on advancing coherent and equitable whole systems and science, education, we call the access projects and then.  Then we're going to shift gears at the end so thinking about the final projects and I did some mapping of your final projects.  To.  The course topics to see like where where do I think they all fit and and we can have a conversation about that what I noticed across all of your proposals.  And then we look at some ways to think about communicating our ideas in science and and then we actually hopefully have some time to plan today, and then the last thing we'll do is I will sign up to present either on a week from today or today.

**no speaker (00:09:54.900):** That makes sense.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:09:59.130):**  Here i'll give you just so that you have access to all the links, this is the.  Link for today, you can also get there.  By.  If you're on the discussion it's a little harder way to find it, but if you're on the discussion from last week, you can click into this inclusion and science critical pedagogy and it's embedded here too.  Alright, so.  we're gonna start with some science.  Questions before I get started.  Alright, just kind of dive dive in see what happens.

**no speaker (00:10:55.890):** When.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:11:03.510):**  You put this up, so that people that are online see as well.  Oh real quick background, so I am a former former animal behavior researcher was really interested in.  lying like a very honest person and so like animals out there lying about stuff, and so I ended up meeting a I was a.  Former student athlete was a runner we had to run 120 miles a week it was crazy and.  I after finishing the first year realized like i'm just going to be tired my legs, are going to be shot and I don't know anything, and it was like that same day, I had this like random home I ran into an.  Animal behaviorist and she was there as pearls saying like.  Writing stuff about them and so now she's standing there, looking at the squirrels i'm standing behind her like Jane goodall like looking at her like two degrees of weird and, finally, I like got the courage to talk to her and say like What do you do.  and  Look at these girls are trying to figure out like they do this weird thing, where, if there are potential cash robbers that might steal from them, they do all of these other behaviors and i'm like wow that's really cool, why did they do that.  it's just like we're trying to figure that out, and it was like the more I asked questions more I got to know like no she said PhD at Harvard she brilliant you literally wrote the book on cardinals.  She knows all 2021 calls what the cardinals are saying what they're so like wait so you're.  brilliant like you know as smart as it comes, but you don't know this thing and she's like yeah that's what scientists are trying to figure these things out and it was like once that.  switch flipped like oh that's what science is science isn't trying to learn stuff that, like other people learn and figure it out and putting books and then like.  You pay the money go to college and somehow people like cut up those books and give it to him a little bit like that's not what it is it's like trying to learn enough so that you have this sense.  Of like oh now I need to ask the questions I get to push forward and redefine what we're doing here, and so I said a little bit about this.  So i've done a ton of crazy things I mentioned the TV, I was a former informal science educator so I got to do everything at the science Museum in.  hartford Connecticut I was the first scientists higher there's a rooftop ernie and I ran all the live exhibits I just program kids and.  While I was there, they asked like can you do TV stuff and I said I never done TV stuff like I could do stuff if you put a camera there, yes, she stuff.  And, and so I got to do all sorts of fun like random science demos, and the biggest thing for me was I trying to.  This got me in trouble in one interview I said I find to be the anti bill nine like bill Nye always gave away all the answers he was like this is cool right.  You don't know how this happens and he would explain it like don't tell me like I want to think about it for a while until I always say like I want these videos to be things that people could get excited about.  But do you have time to think on your own you don't immediately we call it robbing stealing your Aha.  Like those are yours, and so I don't and same with students like I don't want to steal anybody's haha and sometimes even my wife will be saying something to me and i'll say well don't tell like give me a couple days, let me think about it, I just wanna I just want to.  And so what we're going to be doing is.  Is I have these.  PVC tubes drew a fresh in the month, this morning I drew an accident oh.  And I will actually start them in the middle, so that we can all kind of gather around and see it and then i'll get.

**no speaker (00:15:07.500):** them to everybody, today, you can see.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:15:16.530):**  Right together around so you can we can see this one.  I see it, kind of like looking down on it.  So.  i'm gonna put my finger on the X spinning, I want you to stop.

**Felicity Crawford (00:15:46.770):**  tj.  We have two students online.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:15:53.070):**  we're gonna have to explain it to you can see it.

**no speaker (00:15:55.680):** Okay. Later on the X.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:16:09.870):**  Two X and what is the Expo like at this point we're just noticing anything major.  CDs writing on my finger.

**no speaker (00:16:36.960):** That make sense.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:16:39.930):**  Like there are easy to.  Partners today.  possible explanation about what you think is happening and i'll see if I can somehow.  So yeah.

**Felicity Crawford (00:17:22.320):**  So there for students and they know.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:18:08.520):**  Tell me if you can see this.  X.  frame.

**Felicity Crawford (00:18:42.060):**  yeah.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:18:48.420):**  that's what we're all trying to figure out.  got to figure it out.  Okay, what are some ideas, right now, so like right now don't think that you're you've got to have the full explanation.  I always say like imagine that we're all kind of in a circle and you're tossing candidate ideas like maybe it has something to do with your life from those in the Center okay.  You start with me, but I get myself.

**no speaker (00:20:04.290):** In this state that.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:20:11.070):**  Right, so he said, like if I got we said so, when you push it and spends like to be spinning here, it was like yes right yeah it was on the outside, but when you see it fitting it looks like a funny all middle they're going to see that light at the Center of it almost looks like.  you're talking I can talk about.  That like the first thing is often like Oh, maybe i'm just seeing the like thing that goes around the outside.  What else what other ideas are you thinking of your spend it.  And it might be a question I might not be like a I figured out or maybe it has something to do with this, but like Why is this happening.  The mascot I see it, see the thinking.  Let me phrase it rephrase it so what's the weird thing that's happening here like could you can somebody put it into words what's The thing that you're like woody.  sense.  And we feel like you feel like you put any word.  looks like it's spinning from the Center.  So we weren't able to.  It looks like two things are happening at the same time, like it looks like it's spinning around the outside video is good so emotion is a good call so um and what's the weird thing like what why excellent.  What did that happen, what does that have to do.  we're.  The experts.  See, and like that's on one side and that's, on the other side, so it's like helps us see these two opposite things like they're on the same side so i'm.  One of the things that we're.  That we're looking at here is some form of this question like, why is that when you spread to other people.  by pushing down on one simple on one side, you can see that symbol, but you can see the yellow you know they're they're like you stop and you look at it, I know I still do it done 1000 times I feel like.  i'm so like Why can you see it there on both sides, even though i'm when you spin it seems like one goes somewhere else, even know it's there, but it seems like it's not um and so.  This thing is so random i'm sure you've never played with.  An accident, unless you more interest than I am, but like when you're thinking about this, what does this remind you, is there anything that you've done.  That maybe it's not connected to spinning or might be connected to like seeing like what does it make you think of in your life.

**no speaker (00:23:40.110):** You just call it out.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:23:42.180):**  I mean, I do you see so like the perception, like the we know it's there, but we can't see it so what's happening well.  I might be like a real thing or it might be a science idea that you're just like throwing out a vocab word I think when you were sharing the back the.  Eighth going around It made me think of rims like I feel like i'm always wondering like Why can you sometimes see the break thing on some cars, but sometimes you can't.

**no speaker (00:24:21.030):** Are.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:24:27.510):**  Then, obviously, like this yeah we're like a some depending on the ren suddenly they're going backwards when you're going forwards like things that's been in different ways.  And if we had more time to dig into this like the more that we could we think about this start thinking about ideas like.  Like orbits like one thing orbiting another and how similar or different is that to this and M and once we've played around with this, and maybe we even had time to draw.  A lot oftentimes throwing sometimes like this, like the more that we have time to like think about it, we started saying like it's doing two things when we push it it's rolling like this way and it's spinning this way so like really hard to represent in 2d and so.  Often, then say like well, what does it have to do with these.  I do, does this have anything to do with explaining what's going on in these two situations.  How like somebody on the State board and just I mean to me I don't understand that it looks like they're going this way and all sudden they do something with her foot and things split this way in this way and somehow they land on that.  This is whole nother level like you run straight this way in that way and everywhere and I added this one just for fun we actually used to physics program I was sharing this on I love there's a good science at Community community on Twitter and I share it on Twitter and somebody.  Put a.is programming for the dots on her a whole and, as she was spinning it matt it's nothing the acceleration and the velocity of her ankle.  Like right it's going fast I don't know how fast and give a qualitative description of it and.  The.  last thing, so you have the link to the slides and the full explanation, right here.  is why I put all the way up to you, I don't want to steal your.  But if you need to know it, some people are like you have to tell me I can't sleep it's there you can just highlight the text and see it.  But it might be something you want to play around with and think about and i'll have tubes for everybody, but if you need to borrow them definitely you can have them and take them with you, these are all ready to go somebody right after that, given that answer.  So.  So I wanted to give that example of what we call sense, making because it's a little bit different.  From how we all probably experienced science in school.  Usually, we were given a thing or told that, like today we're going to learn about you know acid base reactions and then we're going to do a lab to confirm that, and then you all learned it right up the lab report or something and that's shifted a little bit.  So.  I I shifted so this isn't.  On topic with the tube.  But I want to show you.  Again i'm just on the air in that first stepping piece.  Based on one of your projects, it was around a children's book on some of the topics that we talked about, and so I shifted the example that I was getting into, so this is kind of on topic for you.  So this is one of the standards pages for Science, education, but they're called the next generation science standards.  We often talk to matt talk about the methods new vision, because this is the first time in forever that they not only brought together science experts, but teaching experts and.  People who are experts and how people learn, and so they like.  Literally gave them food and coffee and said you figure it out just paint them put them in a room and let them fight it out, and so what happened is something's moved up something moved down one example, we probably all learned about solids liquids gases together.  gases are crazy like the fact that there's no like bid you all.  You i'm assuming everybody was told that gases filled the shape of their container and that they're everywhere right so there's gas is all around us move your hand to feel the gas, but you move your hands, and you can feel the gas, that means that.  there's room for the gas to go somewhere else, so the gas can't be everywhere, there has to be nothing.  There has to be room for no space, so that we get like push that gas over there and push the gas over there, and so the way that we learned about gases.  was at a level where it's not necessarily like we learned a lot of things, but we just weren't ready to think about the fact that there's gas all around us and there's also nothing around us.  And so.  One of the, so this is here one of the standard of ages and we'll get into all the details, but this is the first grade thing that we call a performance expectations so by the end of.  First grade students should be able to do this, make observations instructor that faith account they young plants and animals are like but not exactly like their parents.  And then that goes into some more details about clarification statements about assessment doesn't include parents or animals that are going to work with this, I read.  It gives a little background information for the teacher, one of the things that changed are these boxes, so the blue is like the practices what scientists and engineers do.  And so they one of the things that came out of it is like we want people to know stuff that's here are the core ideas.  But they shrunk the amount of ideas that students need to leave knowing way down and one of the things that they thought about over coffee.  was like what are those ideas, but like you won't see in this book TV equals in our T.  Like the gas laws aren't there but kinetic molecular theory is there, and like what happens when you like, take a soda can and heat it up like crazy hot.  Is it going to explode and why and so you're you're trying to figure out these things, and one of the things you might use is.  You know people that are T but that's not the core idea that's like an application of the fact that when you heat up things they move around faster.  For the most part, and so it's this combination of like what scientists do what scientists know which increases in progression over time.  And then these kind of concepts are the lens that you might use to figure it out so i'm a lot of research and learning shows that you the lenses progress like when you're.  You know, an expert in science you're thinking through lens is constantly like I see outliers and when you're a novice like.  Just a bunch of points on this graph like I don't know, have you know that was the outlier oh that's not what I was expecting so you have this thing that you are expected and so patterns, is one of the first things that young students see so here it.  Is this progression but.  With these two life science ideas and parents variation of traits in the kindergarten through second grade they're just thinking, like the core idea.  Is they young organisms are very much but not exactly like their parents and they also resemble other organisms, at the same time, so it seems very simple you like to tell them that, and then we go outside and play like this, not that long, but like What do you mean by.  What we mean by very much, and that is exactly like so there's like lots of ideas to MAC and cheese out.  And when you're doing this with like a bunch of first graders it's hard to say like what do we mean that one different different like what.  i'm sure connecting it back to the children's book i'm sure you've seen books about like.  Animals eyes and like liar and some animals eyes on the side of his head versus the front, or like I was just looking at a book at the boss museum of science called like how did they.  Do their nose nose and it was the cutest book about like all these different animal noses and structure and the function and the connections there.  So this shows with Russia over time, you can obviously see 12th grade the same ideas.  DNA perry's instructions for forming these characteristics sell better content genes express myself in different so like those ideas build progress we over time, but they there's less Arabian get more time to really build that foundation.  So.  Why does that matter.  i'm going to i'll jump back to the resource there i'm going to go to the first link.  um we talked about the shift away from learning about the science like somebody else did it, and now we have to learn it and, like lucky us we get to get access to it finally.  versus we get to figure something out and it's not always but just the fact that it's like us messing with the to not watching the video not watching build I explain it.  were part of it it's like part it's it's within our round try to figure it out together.  And so we've talked about we've shifted away from thinking or learning and talked about sense, making the capture as like it's messy.  it's messy and it doesn't just involve the right answers and involves a lot of wrong answers like what else could it be.  Usually, one of the first things teachers ask is like what, if I have that student are so smart and he raises his hand or she raises her hand and says, the thing and.  And they're right like it's going to ruin it for the rest of the class like well I always say like cool what else could it be.  And they're like Why is that not right and everybody else was like wait, am I right or normally right like i'm not sure what to do.  And, and part of the goal is to get away from the one student who's always right or the teacher who knows everything there to shift the agency in the classroom to like we are trying to figure these things out.  The teacher is part of this classroom Community Yes, they know things, and they have expertise in different areas, but it might be repositioned in a way that helps us all.  And so.  i'll let you when I read this phone so all sides were made cultural so human beings, no matter who we are where we live or what language we speak at home, develop our ways of knowing.  Talking valuing and acting as we live our day to day lives inside family community.  These ways of living, what is now understood this culture indeed across communities human beings makes sense of the world in ways that are both similar and different, and so this is a quote from an a chapter and additional book helping features trying to access to those standards but.  One of the big takeaways is that, like we all think about things in different ways, and none of those ways are wrong, are the ways that we try to make sense of the world.  And, and so we have to bring those diverse perspectives to the science in this case to be able to figure things out together if we're going to build this knowledge building.  And like if that's the aim that we lost like as citizens, we want to be able to have arguments and good conversations about using evidence or build on each other's ideas, then we have to do that, since day one, and so that's one of the.  biggest components of this vision.  Is the shift away from like well not science, though science or it's like facts and you just got to know them like yes, there are things that we figured out.  But we figured them out by using these practices that are often very messy and we've moved away from talking about the scientific model as like what's, the first thing you do you write the question the hypothesis, and then you like think in your head a bunch of times.  Which one like and most people hate lab reports middle school and high school students because they're like oh it's just a worksheet.  Not a sign it's a worksheet it's a glorified worksheet that you know we fill out it doesn't have anything to do with science of reasoning and sense, making it's just this like thing that you do and so.  When the show a couple examples.  Of.  In a sense, rethinking the way that we think about who has access to the science ideas and so these are all scenarios that happened.  And happened in schools that were either part of a.  Research Project or part of something else, and so, teachers, asked the parents of the students would find their child to be excused from the microscope unit.  The parents responded that they wanted their daughter included and the teacher should determine how to best include their daughter, and the activities.  Working together the teachers came up with appropriate adaptations, it gives you special paper and markers that produced the range lines created drawing students touch your then describe the lines.  That the student experience that actually so.  seems like a fairly straightforward piece right like.  And it seems crazy that the teachers would say like oh no there's not going to participate in this, and so.  We in terms of the resources resources, for example, again like.  I heard somebody mentioned sound and spending the thing like sound is.  A good resource to try to figure things out we use all of our senses.  So touching to observe a pattern, you might notice something else when you're feeling something a rock may look bumpy but feels smooth and so there's a lot of things you get just from touching it and having verbal descriptions and interactions and then, when we talk with teachers.  we're talking about pedagogy we're talking about like the active teacher like what could you do, that would change your teaching, so we have discussions around like adapting um but.  Show another one, the native American boy second grade starts at school teacher calls the parents, a few weeks later she's concerned boys and socializing with other children during recess apparent as a teacher what is he doing.  and teacher says really spend recess slowly walking the perimeter of the school grounds, looking at different plants.  Very positive for a second response like oh I don't think you should be worried he's probably just meeting is plant and animal relations there and that setting.  is getting to know is relations you likely know some of them there already so we may be feeling more comfortable there let's make sure that he does eventually develop relationships with kids, but I think it'll be fine so in terms of.  Like, what are the resources for sense, making here anybody noticed something like what can we see here the teacher is obviously seeing it as like Oh, this could be antisocial not playing with the other kids doing what these are quote unquote supposed to be doing during the recess.  There they see something that might be a way to flip that narrative.  let's dress to be done or online.  Alright, so um one big one, is the use of observation like slowly walking around observing looking at the plants using ecological reasoning systems thinking and this idea of human nature relations.  That includes like a different way of thinking about how we're connected to the earth, and so the teacher sees it as like this lonely walking around staring out at the trees.  But there is this indigenous ontology there that the teachers not aware of and not recognizing as a resource and and I don't have to study on hand but recent study was just published showing the.  The areas that are the most biodiverse on the planet are not run by anybody with a you know from the West, basically, and so the highest biodiversity on the planet is all from areas.  That are run by indigenous cultures, and so the like the idea that, like we're going to get a degree in land management and then we're going to manage the land.  is wrong, like the way that we're viewing knowledge of systems and how to organize these pieces is wrong and I another one I saved, but I just saw.  Something yesterday somebody was sharing that new research in Washington state is showing that those kind of plants together would never have existed in that way anybody from the Pacific Northwest.  That those plants couldn't possibly exist that way, naturally, and so.  And there's evidence that indigenous populations there saw the benefit to these relationships and like seeded those forests over you know hundred years that was another one that was like pause say the article open keep keep that tab open, but I don't think about that, like.  So i'll share one more of these.

**no speaker (00:43:47.640):** Maybe I will.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:43:50.910):**  get excited time goes so fast.  i'm going to shift to maybe about.  Based on these ideas, what does that mean for supporting equity and justice centered classroom science classrooms.  and  So phil bell is one of the leaders he's the head of France.  To think about this work.  big picture, and this is a picture of his body, but he usually always has on him, whose interests are being served as like this reminder like what am I doing this for like if i'm traveling or i'm doing whatever like to give this talk, and so we included in the slides but.  Behind here, these are, this is the framework that's here, and this chapter 11 so not only did they meet to talk about the science ideas, the the.  The findings of learning and the good teaching but there's an entire chapter on equitable science instruction because across the nation, there were people that were doing well in science and there were people that were not doing well in science across schools.  You know in states, there was a there were areas that we're doing well or schools that were doing well and people.  Other schools that were not doing well, and so the entire aim of Chapter 11 is to say it science isn't something that like oh that's a science person and that's a bad.  person or like classroom shouldn't have the of these are the ones that are stem oriented, and these are steam or these create like no.  that's not that's not Okay, and so instruction should grow out of everyday experience and it should be connected to interest identity, most of the I was just in Vancouver presenting.  A science conference and a ton of research around the biggest potentially the biggest correlation between how well you do in.  ap courses at the high school level one is access but to is your interest and how you see yourself as as a scientist when you're younger.  To like actually developing an identity as like a hobby do this is hugely related to how will you do.  It should leverage science related values, knowledge and practices and not just students with their families.  communities, and it should support students in bringing their full Community resources to bear on situation.  And it shouldn't make diversity visible So those are four of the big kind of takeaways from the chapter, and it is a rich chapter, but I know we were just giving a little bit of a highlight.  And so.  We talked a lot about equity oriented stem and how we have a lot to like you know it's just them, because of political reasons, like that.  pulled out on that a little bit you know people say shouldn't be finished up steam or there's stream with whether it's reading or stream, where the orange religion there's metals would like math in there there's like 1000.  But basically, the national funding for stem programs it's got to face them and it's all connected to stem careers and so.  everybody's a fan like when you see stem most people that are doing good things in the world envisions theme and stream and all these different kind of more inclusive broad.  Things but as soon as you do that, you lose access to a lot of fun thing and so everybody says stem because it's all it all goes back to.  Research where they were basically trying to find people to work in jobs that are stem fields.  And those keep expanding by didn't just released an additional 31 stem careers that are like you look at it and be like all of those are Stanford.  So they're trying to fix that but that I found that people don't know that that's why people just say salmon and are thinking of all these these different pieces so.  They are there's a ton of resources here, this is basically a full day like.  program that will do with people, but I want to highlight that progress with this frequently involved, he said length systems associated with sparkle and equities.  And through this also imagining and resourcing expensive cultural learning pathways so i'm megan bang who does a lot of this work, she was just the keynote and was presenting that.  What we're talking about in the field of science, education, now people would have laughed at us 10 years ago and said, like that's not science like we're talking about it's crazy and so.  we're trying to be several be these like all these lists and I know it's a seems like a laundry list but it's only a just peeking at the surface of all of the things that are wrapped up in that in that kind of work.  So.  So what does this look like i'm going to highlight this.  To kind of connect the two so thinking about this is a online magazine, you can click on it it'll download a PDF but it's so cool where they put it together and just plop it on the website so thinking about.  them as the morning and the idea sense, making putting all those things together, this is.  Basically example where they were doing, making the like you're trying to make stuff they're playing the drones and um.  They call ethical sense, making much like we were trying to make sense of the science thing like How do we make sense of these ethical issues that are happening in the world and.  One of the examples that was just sharing at the conference, two weeks ago with a bunch of you know, five and six year olds that were reasoning about when it rains they they ignore.  This one school they play outside year round, like cold, we put a jacket on we go out there kids want to go out there, we go.  And they had this conversation of like when it rains all of the words go out there and we find them on the sidewalk and we don't want them to get squished because sometimes you find one like dried up what's up with that one and, like can we hit, should we help them all back and.  So traditionally that question would be like a no come on everybody inside we gotta we gotta boo boo boo.  But the teacher stopped and said, like let's have this conversation like should we what would happen every time all the worms went on, there we move them back.  And, and this idea of shouldn't be questions came up that like this if we every time they go out there, should we move them back and wanted said, well, I don't know what they're doing but.  If every time I went outside someone came to move me back i'd be like I just went out there don't pick me up and coming back so you said to the worms must want to be out there.  And they got into I mean, these are kindergarten students, they got into well if the if that's the only chance that the birds get to eat them.  Then, if we do that, like if we every time everybody on the planet move all the worms and all the birds have died, like some of the worms have to gain by birds past.  And so they got into some really kind of deep ethical conversations with a bunch of kindergarten students, he wouldn't think would have those kind of deep conversations, so in this example.  Like.  They they're trying to come up with things that they can make, and so this group that we're going to design an APP to kind of make sure it'll be accessible to people in our communities.  And so black young person acid it's okay to make things specifically for black people and young girls thinking about how the things she's starting to make a similar to things her mom makes.  A group of young people are applying remote controlled drones to an obstacle course, so this is like a three still recorded yet yes of this that are in this magazine and i'll just highlight.  they're also good so i'd recommend Okay, all of them.  But.  Based on time i'll show this one so.  This student was saying that she she was talking with somebody that came in and they said you gotta keep going.  And the students and like it's still doesn't feel like science, and so the mentor that was there during the question said, like it's like science, how come he doesn't be like science, because it doesn't have any science stuff.  What is science stuff you think um, and so this is the same conversation just broken down and so at the beginning, the students saying it didn't feel like science because.  The example that the mentor gets is like will have your animal I said what was that when you open it up and go inside and see it's got to know.  And so the mental shifts to say i'm rather than saying like silence like well have you ever seen people do that as a.  dad do that, like something to do that, we want to get a Turkey for thanksgiving for like cooking reasons, and so the conversation starts to shift into away from science into like people do this and the student respond by saying.  Like I touch the horse stall, you were saying about your mom interested like yeah she takes out all the organs of a chicken and.  And so, this is like a very small vignette but just showing that very quickly, this one student shifts away from thinking about like out of science stuff and I don't do dissections to like well you know we do do that and there's even.

**Felicity Crawford (00:54:43.170):**  In how.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:54:44.040):**  The student used organs, instead of guts to think about like maybe the science that we're doing like we know with your guitar and we use them that way um and.  One of the other examples is about drones and thinking about like drums are cool they're just toys.  And the mentor had the idea to bring up like actually there's more to drones like people are using them for war and for all for spying and so like.  The actively not avoid some of these conversations or conversations about like is it okay to make an APP that's that's aimed at black people having access to this APP I believe it's for.  it's like a beauty APP and the one of the white mentors says like and I use it and normally that would be you know, a scary conversation to have and and how this is playing.  And so they you're talking about like dealing with people are being targeted, I mean a lot of negative things also okay now how did stage something or not excluding other reasons.  So, including those conversations, rather than staying away from them so there's some other examples in there as well.  A great great resource.  So.  we're going to shift to thinking about like So what does that mean for our in this course and.  I took your final project proposals and tried to there were all phenomenal.  and  I get very excited I get a feel like it's like a little like I get to come at the end and see all the amazing things you've been working on and.  The.  i'm sorry you're all around us.  So.  I based on my.  Quick read of these I did a little mind back.  To the map just based on your abstracts like what your initials here, we thought we had that I could see some connected to these defected education.  Still connected to health care, but thinking more about the achievement gap and students being in schools cultural competence in medical education.  So still like a means to thinking about improve the improvements that are necessary in medicine to that we're connected to algorithmic finance.  These I are both connected to help make sense um but there's like this, like need for a policy like what does it mean toward thinking about individual versus collective.  In the example was coated and then he's at the health and there was one to 10 X so i'm going to give I go back and forth on having like actual hard copy examples, there are links to these online.  I want a number.  Those of you who are online.  i'm just passing out a couple examples of these, but you can also click on all of them, I only print it out to you.  So I just want to take it take a second and look at like what is the information in here what are these telling you um if you'd rather read it read it online, you can tell these links that are on your way.  To be rather than online.  they're all linked on that same agenda scroll down a little bit Turner and it'll bring you right to this and teaching tools website.  So just take a minute or two to click on them or flip through them and see.  What are they telling you, and how are they are they showing it so you may want to click on a couple.  and compare them, they all have basically this a similar format.  Everybody who gets their bike check out the slides.  30 more seconds.  Alright So what do you notice about these.  might be any content, it might be and how its presented.  for things that stood out to you.

**no speaker (01:03:19.980):** takes you to the exact resource, I think, received the information which involves fruitful in terms of also sharing how they develop their own idea that it's not just like the penny and there's a lot of research behind that. chairman.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:03:35.760):**  Of the things we know.

**no speaker (01:03:41.670):** That for us very digestible by my mom the teacher completed getting.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:03:49.050):**  This by like cutting out extraneous and the fact that it's like they're very short, to the point, and like clearly breaking it down like questions like what why how.

**no speaker (01:04:02.220):** Very just all. options and reflection questions. Very actionable.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:04:18.750):**  yeah yeah it's not by.  No means we're hey, but when I see those emails that are just like just fyi like Maybe those What are those just that by.  I do read them like care deeply about.  But.  These the first few didn't start that way, and so I always wonder about like I think they were trying to figure it out like, how do we fit all this information in here.  And I worked with a team to Britain three of them, and they are so hard to write in one like we can get we have one more on the prospecting concepts that we're working on.  finalizing and it's like four and a half pages right now and we're trying to do, the thing with the links that were like, how do we say this better like you know if you know it well enough, you should be able to say it in a more simple way and so.  But it's so hard to be able to drill down, but such a useful process to be able to think about these in this way and.  The ultimate aim is that there's so much research that's out there that never makes it into the hands of practitioners so like, whether that be teachers with a be informal educators, with just be like somebody who's trying to figure out like Why is my.  You know my kid is doing science science like coming home with all these questions I wanted to call the teacher like did you teach anything like they.  can't figure out why this tool works, you should teach them why this works and so there's a lot of information in here, so one of the things that I thought we would do is, if you click on the find your slides.  you'll notice that I created.  slides.  for everybody, that is, strictly the content so you'll see.  i'm.  A creative basically our own rhs planning tool and so here at the top, I did ask about the format like this is only two pages, how are you using I think I might have said wasting when I asked filled out.  So you're wasting a whole half to the to the photo like could you put good stuff here, and he said he laughed and said to john learning scientist, so I know that this is full of words, nobody would even catch it in the first place, and like no one's gonna pick up this worksheet.  And so, he said, it has to be this photo that kind of draws you in.  And so that we don't have that, so I changed it to mo format you choose who's your target audience the guiding question and.  I tried to map these ideas of things that might be helpful for you to think about what your final project so you're taking the topic.  What is the issue I think most of you, I saw this at all of your proposals like you've clearly defined what the issue is.  But, like in this is meant to be when you hand it to somebody a colleague here they're going to read this and go that's what we're talking about, and then they hop right over to why it matters.  And it it brings it home it connects into like why it matters to you, no matter when you're reading you're like Oh, that is let's talk about me like this one about 79.  i'm going to be teachers if i'm a teacher if i'm a district person i'm going to read the second one or.  Educational leader might read that and this connecting with peers and colleagues is a like a thing that they might use to go through that.  And then on the back things to consider, so in this case for this class and the final project, but what are your, what are the things where are you going to get information, and I know I pick up with six bullets here, I think you need five or maybe three to five.  But like why just want to know why not another one, so I can you make an argument for why that one resource in the perfect one.  And then I always skip the reflection questions because those are meant to come back to it like after we look at these that will be checking out.  that's something that we might then just discuss like do we have an answer, is this a moment to be richer questions than.  just something that will be easy to agree on and then recommended actions you can take so in this case like what's the main thesis what are you arguing for and that might be.  In the case of a children's book and it's even harder usually the like what's the message that you want that are greater to walk away with.  You have more space and a paper to be able to write that out um How is this specifically calling out like how do these things that tend to equity and then Might there be a reflection question.  And so, in our case you're going to be signing up for presentations.  For next Thursday the following Tuesday like what are the questions that maybe you're going to pose and there might only be one if it's a really good rich question i'm.  kind of hard to just come one like what's the question that you might end up like after all this now, this is making me think this or i'd like to think about this question so.  I at the bottom of the slide.  image, hopefully, on your screen and you can I just took it from the thing.  So you can make it bigger so.  and  i'm happy to have conversations around I tried to summarize it like a word or two and use your initials down here.  find your slide there are two slides for every group or individual.  And then, if you're if yours is not.  And I just went through the Google folder and read every one that was in there, so if yours was not in there and just grab the lenses on if you don't see your initials or your topic on that.  So we're going to spend the.  We have the next slide 20 minutes mapping out these I know if feel free to take a break.  From the bathroom and get water anything and then i'm going to be available and walking around if your specific questions around like how might you capture these ideas or.  If you're thinking of a project that like I might go more creative with this and you want to talk about how to do that I love the creativity.  i've done things for podcasts I I started a website connected to the standards and the science phenomenal stuff literally over a lunch break working with a bunch of teachers.  And there's over 3.5 million users on the site right now it's pretty crazy, and so it might be just like a simple site.  That you want to put out there, like, I always try to think bigger like if it's a project for this class and it's a paper that might.  You know, be something that you highlight later, you turn into something else, but if it's something that.  You are attaching to a portfolio or it's a podcast that you're putting out there, that you can link to that really shows something you're passionate about like think about ways to leverage the work that you're doing and and and broaden the horizons any questions what we're doing.  Or we can find their slides.  Any questions for the online people feel free to chat.  alright.  If you have individual questions, let me know.  These are just Google slides and I the background, has the words on in so the front, or just text boxes he's working on stuff get rid of that.

**Felicity Crawford (01:18:10.860):**  So no questions yet.

**no speaker (01:18:14.550):** it's.

**Felicity Crawford (01:18:16.230):**  still here.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:34:37.260):**  was like three more minutes for work on these..  don't have to worry about getting all the way through it in this time now just wanted to create some space for you to be able to think through this..  You guys normally go till 630 right..  we'll wrap up..  Alright, so..  there..  Did we want to share out quickly I there's something that you captured or something that you were thinking about struggling with and trying to condense it down into these topics..  The things we were thinking through or maybe rethinking..  it's going to be plugging away..  But it's great the more time that you have to be able to think about like what would go into each box, the stronger on a piece would be your your argument and also I linked a template for the presentation here..  And you'll notice that they are the same spots, for the same basic boxes..  The..  I linked it here, just as a template preview mode so that way easier to see, and when you download it it'll download justin to your um your folder..  Google has figured out oh yeah, but if you change the top..  preview it'll be here for project title..  The statement of topic interest reason and format and then project details, what are the main sources so that was that second box on the top what format, if you choose if you're using..  This was basically could, if you're using not a research paper and you want to talk more about how you're going to do, the thing more provide examples that's there and then what's the main pieces trying to get across with your target target..  So the whole aim here is not to like present your paper it's not the like final presentation, but your window into the projects because not everybody to read yours or see it or go through it, so we have at least..  So if you click on..  sign up to present..  It will open up this and I don't believe we need all the slots you're already me you got it, so I don't think we will need all of them, but..  I figure structure it's about gives us 10 minutes to do an intro and then everybody about 10 minutes for the presentation and five minutes for comments questions..  i'll give you a second to do that..  Alright, so i'm..  Sure things the we've got through all of the links on here the for next class is just a bookmark little link is down here so for our discussion..  um..  So, between now and Tuesday..  The there are two..  kind of buckets of things that you can dive into um they are high quality resources around the topics related to this class and education..  But their broad in how you would like to for them, so one is this dude it from the Fred hutch cancer Center out in..  Seattle and it's on race racism in genetics and so it's a high school unit so it's very similar to the ideas presented this class they dive into..  what's happening with historical inequities and what's happening currently and and so, if you're interested in that..  I encourage you, when you click on here it'll open up a thing with all sorts of different resources, you can see the lessons, you can look at a bunch of different..  Things there is a survey for like if you're going to teach it don't do that unless it..  But i'm wondering if if you're interested in that, let me check out your pre bottle so there's a free model, there are, that is supposed to help teachers who are uncomfortable with this topic..  get more comfortable So if you choose to go that route, I encourage you to go through the pre module like there is a slide there that summarizes what the students are going to learn a lot of state here it's a comparative will be there..  Because I know the folks that put that together we're really struggling with like, how do we even talk about this if we can't get into the College level science that we discuss and and I know people here are thinking about well how do we..  get more people involved in this class and what kind of science, we need to pull out to make this like a freshman or sophomore level class so that's one option, the second is forum..  pays, which is basically a informal science group and they put together that we're calling it or anti racism ground up and is a massive list of all sorts of different resources, and so, if you have to go that route, then..  They might be virtual resources they might be connected to museums, they might be hacked all three different things..  So if you choose to go that route it's just to explore and and on Tuesday be ready to discuss and share a little bit about like what did you find out of it connect some of the ideas in this course or or didn't fill a gap in your thinking and..  and.  we're gonna wrap up there..  and.  It says be ready to share a slide that I don't think we need to do that so just be ready to discuss what you found when you selected and I think it..  Was additionally 15 slide but based on, so we are going to meet on zoom on Tuesday, and I think it will be part of that is because we'll be sharing screens of like I did this part, this is what I found..  So if there are things that you like, I want to talk about this Green rabbit the screen grab it and that way you can share or if it's a resource that you explore that want to talk about might just drop a link to the chat and then everybody can all share my screen..  You don't have to worry about anything additional sure you're putting together lots of things lots of classes right now..  Okay, one more thing any questions..  Alright that's a wrap..  Thank you so much..  Happy Friday Eve..  Thank you.

