---
---

# Galton & The Eugenics Movement/Return of Race Science & The Biology of Skin Color

**Date:** 2/8/2022

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:02.669):**  So it's great to see everybody in person.  i'm sorry about last week, hopefully we'll be back on track whoops that is not what I wanted to do.  Okay, and thanks group one I saw you just put stuff up in the dropbox so I have everything I need for Thursday so.  Today we're going to be covering a lot of different topics when it comes to thinking about genes we're going to talk a lot about skin color, which is a multi low side gene compared to what we talked about last week with sickle cell disease.  And we're going to start thinking about eugenics, especially with the case studies that have been assigned.  And one of the reasons we focus so heavily on the eugenics era and less classes, because it really enabled.  The worst things that science has done to people ethically and the the biggest ethical lapses.  which you know is epitomized by the fact that the Nuremberg Code was developed after World War Two as a way to try to guide ethical experiments on human subjects, because just the horrors of Nazi science and what it did to people was.  You know, beyond anything.  And so.  we're gonna focus on that and it's gonna be it's gonna be a pretty heavy debt but.  But it's so important, so we really do need to go there and then for Thursday right our discussion is going to talk about like some of these topics, and so, in general, we're going to start off Thursday i'm going to go over everybody's group analysis and.  we'll talk in a whole group about sort of different takeaways from that, and you know pointers because you're going to be doing your first solo analysis coming up with the case study right.  Then we'll have our general reading discussion So these are the general readings for this week so there's another couple chapters in superior there's a chapter in this book called medical apartheid called the Black store, which is about.  For sterilization, which is a form of negative eugenics.  And then, this is sort of this little exercise that goes along with what we're doing today and talking about skin color it's a it's about 20 minutes, like a video with a quiz.  I encourage everybody to take a look at it take the time to take a look at it, because i'd really like to discuss it as a class like what people's thoughts about it, were they liked it if they didn't if it surprised them if you did it.  And then the last part of this session, the specific part is actually going to be you trading ideas about what you might do for your case studies so.  I encourage you to take a look at the folder that has all the case studies listed in perusal you're going to pick one that you're going to do annotation and analysis.

**no speaker (00:03:25.800):** On.

**Melisa Osborne (00:03:27.570):**  Technically, you could start your annotation at any time, it will carry over once you're actually assigned it, but you know I want you to think about what you might like to do.  And sort of look at different options and that kind of thing to get an idea.  So those are announcements for today.  So, in terms of delving into the subject matter today, so I want to dedicate today's lecture.  To turtles can return so um interestingly right, this was the first African American to receive a graduate degree from the University of Cincinnati and university or.  graduate from university and a PhD from the University of Chicago.  and  I would not have known about Charles Henry except for the fact that someone did their project last Semester and included.  him in their product, so one of the students last semester, this is a page from his final project is final product was like a book, where he illustrated five stories of overlooked scientists.  there's meant to be kind of like a children's type book So this was kind of like the third chapter that he dedicated.  To this, and so my purpose in showing you this is twofold because one.  we're going to talk about final projects as we get further into semester, but you may have seen that as kind of like a nebulous thing looming at the end of the Semester right.  But I want to give you an example of the form it might take, so in this case, you know he made a PDF it's like five pages and each page is like formatted nicely with this really cool biography of scientists and so trophy returner.  He was.  alive from 1867 1923 so he predates here Wilson, and those evolutionary biologist and he easier plenty of ease and actually come up with some really fundamental concepts about.  cognition and behavior in bees and Apps and other insects loads of years before the rest of the field of evolutionary biology and so.  he's overlooked, but brilliant and if you're interested there's a very comprehensive review in like the journal entomology.  That talks about sort of all the different cool research models he worked on, because he worked on honeybees and other models and he actually he studied honey bee vision which is very complex.  So yeah so I wanted to kind of set to class stay on for all returner because one he's a contemporary a lot of a lot of the scientists we're going to talk about with the eugenics era, but he's.  Just there doing his awesome science and additionally Eo Wilson has been in the news a lot and i'm like summer on someone that's, not even a real.  So yeah.  Phase dedication.  alright.  So today, what are we talking about.  So we're going to go back over the foundations of scientific racism very briefly.  and part of that is because we're going to in that context talk about how the oversimplification of complex trait inheritance by race science.  is part of the reason for the eugenic thinking being the way it is in the beginning of the 1900s right, so you know.  There was this idea of Mandela inheritance, where you have symbol dominant and recessive inheritance and people started to try to apply that to things like intelligence and skin color it's like no it's not that simple, but the reductionism lead to sort of these these.  Really, you know vicious ideas, and so this gives us into thinking about Francis Scotland eugenics.  And the consequences of thinking which is sort of leads us into the case studies as well, because they show us the consequences of eugenic thinking.  And for the most part we're going to be focusing today on the period through like molecular genetics up until the 1970s and then next week we're kind of going to be thinking more about.  From that period to now, when we have whole genome sequencing data, and as we get into that into the present day.  And so, something you'll notice about.  The actual assignee his book if you if you've read sort of the chapters is in some respects.  Historically, or do you think of the historical timeline you kind of have this eugenic the eugenics thinking that leads into what happened in World War Two.  What happened with Nazi Germany and science and eugenics that time and how there was sort of this never again line that was put there and then she goes on to the talk about how even though people put that line there.  there's a resurgence in that line of thought post World War Two this happened and honestly that I think we're living through today.  And so we'll get cool we're going to kind of cover this first piece of history, today, and then the next couple of weeks are going to be focused on how that second piece of history, but you know they're very intertwined, you will see things come back.  from one area to the next.  Alright, so go ahead excellent, so this is a.  reproduction of sort of approach dice.  Drawing that kind of news eugenics is this bountiful tree, is it says eugenics is the self direction of human evolution has all these disciplines.  Right listed under here psychology history biology.  And so you know we've we've talked about this.  How, you have this baseline for thinking about me and humans that creates the hierarchy that started with one as soon as the classification system.  yeah sorry.  I put a link in the perusal does it work okay.  Yes.  No it's Okay, so if folks to work on the website I don't know why it isn't though so i'm going to have to troubleshoot it after class it has something with like to do with publishing it and putting it, oh no not at all thanks for interrupting let me know.  So, and actually I should probably put this in the zoom chat as well, for those.  That are always do.

**no speaker (00:11:23.100):** yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (00:11:38.100):**  Thank you.  That we've talked about.  And so, then we've also talked about how then the theories of evolution got laid out on this model with the idea that be superior clinics in the taxonomy are actually something that's inherently.  And or evolved, so those ideas but added pre Darwin.  And then, as we got into the ERA right there were common misconceptions about heredity and then got added to the model of taxonomy and have a listen and so this is sort of a singing about survival of the fittest.  Applying in general and sort of percenters social Darwinism.  And so I want to just make the point here right the genetics are live on this framework that the fittest most superior traits can be inheriting and evolve.  In a group of organisms, and you know eugenics was applied and thinking about humans right, so the origin of this word right you comes from the Greek preface for good.  And jeans that we talked about last week was quoted as a term in 1909 by will help Johansen to describe men deleon units of an inheritance.  So side Facebook right so eugenics as a definition is this idea of using social control to improve the health of the intelligence of future generations.  And so to kind of.  get into why.  The idea of improving intelligence based on eugenics.  Is.  So flawed in its premises.  Last week we talked about mendel's laws of the parents right, and so we talked about the p experiments, which is one of the p experiments is down is.  is outlined here that we talked about this idea of these invisible factors which later named genes and so you know today we make this distinction right between the outward appearance of a plant or an individual the phenotype in its genetic traits the genotype.  But when we think of.  phenotypes right it's really important to know that there can be a large amount of diversity and different phenotypes so like last week when we talked about this, we talked about the sickle cell trait, which is an example of the inherited medallion disease.  And today we're actually going to get more into thinking about things that are phenotypically really complex in this case skin color so.  We can ask ourselves the question right, what is the source of the diversity of phenotypes for a particular organism, you know, sometimes it's said that it's simply due to genetic drift random trance right that populations move around and groups of organisms move around.  And sometimes there is evolution of different phenotypes under different selection.  and actually sickle cell anemia is an excellent example of this right, because malaria is an environmental selective.  And so, when we talked about that shrink this is sort of a pioneer square thinking about.  Where if you have two parents that are heterozygous for the recessive mutated.  Even.  If you make a pioneer square a possible off screen right there are asked him that are malaria susceptible because they have both.  Leo they are our offspring in a malaria resistant, because one of the museum and there are some offspring back have sickle cell disease.  And both of the mutated copies and there's a selective pressure right in malaria endemic regions for the inheritance of both copies.  And so, this was from the pill it all paper where they looked at the real frequency of the mutated hemoglobin g.  In Africa, Europe, Asia and what they saw right was a meal frequency was more frequent in regions where malaria was super in depth, so you go from malaria free regions to Polish them up regions that have large incidences the foyer.  And so, this is an example of what we're talking about here were hundred different weapons structures in different environments, you can have.  This source of phenotypic diversity.  And that's like I said it's an example of something that is a relatively it's a single low sigh T.  But when it comes to thinking about these other phenotypic differences that the genesis try to talk about so in race crossing in Jamaica right there trying to talk about a simple black and white difference.  In some of the papers like when people talk about intelligence right they try to talk about you know simple differential in IQ or something like that right and those types of things.  are actually multi site rates and are very complex they're more like the spectrum and so we're actually going to talk about skin color today because.  It goes along with the question that we first asked when we were talking about his race biological and a lot of people look at skin color.  As a way to say that race is biological and what I hope I can convince you with today is that that's not true there's a whole spectrum of skin colors because of selective pressures of the environment, but it's not a simple gradation.  And it doesn't make sense to act like people fit in civil categories Okay, so this is actually a really nice graphic of.  How skin color tends to vary across the globe Globe based on sunshine, so this was worked on by Nina de blasio who has a wonderful book called living color if you're really interested in this topic and the intersection of race and biology and society.  Basically, in her research she's done a lot to show that human skin is dark from where we need like a strongest, which is in the tropics regions where the sunlight strongest most of the year.  and actually.  Oh.  So the facts are that you know human skin color is determined by the mouth of a painting of a woman or you know and there's also you know and.  That is produced in the skin, and so this is probably getting so it's encoded by multiple genes we're going to talk a little bit about them and how they are rules and different and that throughout the migration of people, so there are actually a really large range of phenotypes.  And there's actually a near perfect correlation between the average skin color of her population of humans and the level of UV light to which they are exposed.  So what do I mean by that, so this is an idea of UV light intensity in sort of arbitrary arbitrariness.  And this is the measured skinny wraps activity of that particular population at 685 millimeter wave sort of a darker way.  Like a brown brown hair and on what you can see, is like they said, this is pretty much linear why that, depending on how much you'd be late intensity of population gets.  Its skin the skin color will be adapted in order to deal with that UV light intensity and so it's interesting because when you think of.  The people from the Romanian period and they're accountable for their groups right.  People would get on a boat and they would say out somewhere else and they'd see another population, and it would seem drastically different to that right in terms of what the other group looks.  But if you actually get on your feet at the typical of you know, Africa and you walk North and you cross over you know.  Oh, my God when geography so bad, but if you cross over you know where Egypt goes into the Middle East and keep going North if you go, you know through Italy and you keep going.  to Scandinavia you're going to encounter a whole spectrum right you're not going to just see one day people look this way and, one day, people there's a whole broad spectrum.  So.  In thinking about the travel occupations around the world, initially, there were actually two alternative.  hypotheses that were proposed for how modern humans came to be spread around the globe, so there was sort of this multi regional hypothesis that fully monitored humans actually evolved in parallel, from local populations of hora so.  In this model.  You have sort of.  A couple million years ago and then there's a diaspora, and then there's interbreeding but, for the most part, these are separate.  That was the first one.  The second model that has actually come to be accepted, based on evidence is the out of Africa replacement that actually argue that there's kind of been like two sporadic Margaret migrations of people so originally.  migrated out of Africa.  And then homo sapiens kind of developed and about 100,000 years ago that was sapiens group spread throughout the.  world, so this might replace the regional populations of homo sapiens homo derived from the first hominid.  and actually that's also more now because it actually has been quite recently that there was integrating between me and then me.  Yes.  Oh, my goodness.  I don't know that off the top of my head.  So.  Ah.  So.  I feel like the, the one that is that that can happen, eventually, but it's hot like the timescale on that is just.  almost incomprehensible to us like it's you know it's hundreds of thousands of years.  So.  So this has largely been so this replacement.  is largely been supported by the genetic data that has come first in the molecular genetics era and now in the whole genome sequencing.  And so, using especially only your visa.  genomic analysis using mitochondrial DNA as a molecular clock.  The time of the genetic divergence right from home or up this looks to be at the 50,000 years and that's supported by many Jeanette.  And so, this is just a general figure that traces how different populations moves throughout the world, and one thing that's important to note about this is even though there's this out of Africa hypothesis, and the idea that this is the origin of where.  There has been what they call as an excuse me in people returning from outside of Africa into.  That as well, and that is also a source of phenotypic diversity.  And so, in thinking about this graph it's actually very interesting to note that, because of how.  This works and how variation occurs actually looking at Africa in terms of phenotypic diversity.  is a very good model for thinking that humanity as a whole, when it comes to skin color and so there's been a lot of questions about how.  Human beings, especially those in Africa, develop a palette of skin tones that we see you know, then that UV plot, where different UV levels have different skin colors and so basically.  In Africa, specifically, there are six genes that have been found to be linked to pigmentation so they're listed here I don't expect you to memorize them or anything for a quiz.  So the thing that's interesting about these is some of these variants occurred earlier than others in the scheme of human.  Movement, and so, in fact I love St 12 is one of the earlier.  Difference it was one of the earlier legal and participates, so this is from us study of skin color so the participants that have the darker skin in this particular study were more likely to have a variation and.  That led to reduce gene expression.  In.  In that particular population.  And these variants this original variant rose about nine years ago, so, if you look at the timeline actually so ancestral needs.  From that first movement of homo erectus out of Africa, and then the second means from the sort of second movement of homo sapiens throughout the world what you see is that.  The darker skin pigmentation pain so for MS PAC 12 and also there's a couple other genes, they are historically earlier in the history of humankind, whereas the.  leela giving rise to letter pigmentation occurred later as.  People move out of Africa into regions that have less UV light right.  And so.  In thinking about this right.  Humans were living in an environment with more you'd be like so they have dark skin to protect themselves from UV radiation, but when populations migrated away from the equator lighter skin evolved.  So that if he was to produce vitamin D.  So there are variances these genes that are associated with skin light skin eyes and hair that are typically considered to be traits from those that live in Europe.  But there are other people in Africa, they also have these very.  Because they were living in regions that have less you'd be like okay.  And so, these various roles in Africa and then spread.  So then, and then as SLC 20 485 is very focused on and it's also common in East Africa and arose 30,000 years ago, causing cells to make less.  And so you know in thinking about this right, the full range of human skin phenotypes can be found in this one continent.  And so to get back to what you're talking about you know, in the.  early part of thinking about you know variation in humans, why is there such variation well there are evolutionary pressures right.  Based on the vitamins and nutrients that are related to skin color and so it's important to hear for so for this particular thing right.  The reason you be trends so much with this is because the body requires that UV radiation to make an essential vitamins vitamin D and so, if you go somewhere or if you travel to higher latitudes in order to absorb enough vitamin D.  You actually have to have a lighter pigmentation on your skin, in order to get the amounts that are required, and so the stages of these genes that were selected for and, additionally, there is actually an additional ask them to that which is fully fully formed acid metabolism so.  On one hand, you need UV light to make vitamin D, on the other hand, UV light actually causes your body to degrade fully and so.  Low for like levels of pregnant women cause birth defects, I take a supplement that has full late in it every single day.  And so, in this sense, you have two competing selective factors here dark skinned protective against fully depletion right because you're presenting the light the energy from the light getting through and breaking down fully, but it is a lowly radiation you're getting more of that light.  And you're able to make the vitamin D, you have both things going on, and so, based on where you live geographically, the selective pressure for your skin pigmentation varies so if you live in a little UV light area.  You will be able to make out of vitamin D and you would be able to.  Not have your full breakdown too much and so babies, with the lighter pigmentation would get the vitamins that they need that whereas there's love.  For me with dark skinned and the UV for a reason, because the vitamin D for the babies with it and there's a specific condition, when you have low vitamin D rickets is.  And so, then the reverse is true in areas where there's kind of UV light levels.  The selective structures, meaning that the babies and how darker completion are saving their families are getting good amount to women and he whereas.  If you have cascading you're not you're getting adequate vitamin D, but you're fully to susceptible breaking down because you don't have the job of protecting it.  And so there's this trade off.  And so that is why there was, like the actor or the slt 24 a five illegal in regions that have mobile licenses as humans migrated to.  To the northern regions in some regions, away from the equator.  Okay.  And so, really, the important thing.  To take away with this is that there are also multiple sites that are involved.  The dark skin is more photo protective some light skin.  But there's a trade off with.  In the fact that having dark skin is protective of the full week, whereas on pale skin, it can help you make vitamin D in areas that have low look less like less up.  And it's actually been found, so now that there's genome wide association studies, you know, there are variants that are significantly associated.  With skin pigmentation and account for about 30% of the phenotypic variation that is seen in humans.  And, as I mentioned a lot of these are associated with this one particularly SLC for a.  But even with all that.  You know this particular legal was introduced in.  A little over 5000 years ago which, in terms of like evolutionary time is like very recently right um has you know it rose to high frequency there because the UV levels are less in that region, then in editorial.  So this is.  Just sort of thinking back to older populations, so this is from the nature people live, they actually managed to get approval ancient DNA for people from populations that are considered hunter gatherers really farmers and of other ancestry and all it shows is that when.  People move into an environment with less you like, there was an increased prominence of this SLC 45 a to legal.  So it's just kind of.  The data behind.  What we just talked about okay.  But you know the key takeaway is, we can talk about all of these different genetic variants from four regions of the human genome.  But they're shared across the globe, so those genetic variants are shared from group to group in places that have similar UV light levels, whether you're on one side of the globe, or the other.  And so, really, this really frames things in the fact that, even though these variants lead to something so visual and humans are visual animals that see these differences, you know they're these differences are.  So.  In thinking about.  This on the whole.  Right and especially right, this is why I talked so much about variation within the African clock right because, when people put people in racial hierarchy.  They tend to put them in Africa together is supposedly dark skin and the thing is there's more variation within that group.  right that we designate as a race then between that group as another group, and this is a really common thing genetic data and thinking about genetic differences.  That you will be as likely to have a genetic difference from someone that grow up right next to your whole life there's probably more difference between you and that person, then there is between you and someone who wound up across the globe.  it's really.  An important concept in thinking about why biology doesn't support putting people into the social race boxes that exist.  Until this is just a quote from this one TV program I think that you know, imagine if we taught this.  You know, from the very get go.  And so, unfortunately i'm going to spend the rest of today telling you about the world in which this is not taught, but this is sort of why this class is here right.  And so any questions at this point we'll take a drink of water.  SUP and the second part of today we're going to talk about gotten eugenics and the consequences of eugenics and a lot of this comes from people not thinking along these lines and thinking along the line of trying to put people in boxes based on social categories.  So.  Well done, and the eugenics.  gets a lot of the attention, I guess, in terms of being thought of as one of the instigators of eugenics thinking and he was a cousin of Charles darwin's.  And so you are talking about the inheritance patterns right in this idea of basic inheritance of a single low citrate so often, the father, you know it so at this time right, this is 1883.  So inheritance is thought of in terms of you know, civil dominant recessive inheritance, this was actually.  A tree that our friend Francisco put together about houses Marcus family.  Okay, so you have the brilliant people, the people will sign it, and then under.  which I, like, I wonder how those other normal for children felt about their position like putting like thanks man.  But i'm.  So over here.  darren's up here and you can see right, you can this together himself there's really no.  like it.  It speaks for itself, so you know gotten thought that the intelligence that was inherent in him and his cousin Charles was you know inherent in their fam yeah.  exactly right third generation you tried.  Yes, like almost like yeah almost all these guys, are you know super intelligent, but none of the girls right.  yeah.  I haven't noticed actually that the know, women are considered to have inherent ability.  Oh.  Francis is our own President was influenced by her rip spencer's interpretation of darwin's work into social Darwinism, and so he actually.  Is the person that's given credit for using the term eugenics and making it widespread and so he calls this the signs of improvement stuff no by no means confined to questions of judicious mating but which takes cognizance of all.  However, did agree to give them more suitable races or strains of blood, a better chance of prevailing speedily over the last suitable than they otherwise would.  And so.  You can tell, he was pretty obsessed with intelligence, so he was concerned with the decline of Jesus.  Because he considered intelligence to the territory of thought that the upper class included the most intelligent people.  And he actually he considered himself an expert on human difference.  Which is interesting, because in some respects, that is a common theme that you genesis eugenic thinking really just focus on differences, rather than similarities between me.  And so gotten promoted something he called positive eugenics idea of motivating the upper classes to procreate.  However, the flip side of this is what we call negative eugenics, which is the idea of preventing individuals who are considered.  On fit, which is where one of the titles for the case study.  From having children and so actually as early as 1907 the first laws were passing us for sterilization.  And, as I mentioned before eugenics was later used to justify Nazi extermination camps, and so this is an example.  Of a poster from the eugenics society is released the stranglehold of hereditary disease and.  So.  And so I think this is one of the best points that he makes in the chapter reading.  Is that the thing about eugenics was that it was more than a theory, it was a plan in search of policy.  So there's actually if you're really interested in this in the history of the United States and immigration, the garden gate by Daniel okrent is a really great book that kind of details how this was such a policy issue.  In the United States, you genesis spent more than 40 years trying to get eugenic policies passed as legislation in the form of immigration caps, in the form of these.  sterilization loss, and you know, a tragedy of things is that they were largely successful.  In and then those caps and this is really sad they kept I had rapper questions that were pulled through Europe during World War Two so.  One thing that I read up about just recently, is that and frank right her family tried to come to the United States but immigration crops were so strict they weren't able to come here.  And you know ultimately her family place but that's just one of like tons of examples where turning this into a policy has these consequences so just like with one as it's more than a theory, you know, in the end and that's why it's important to think about it.  But.  In the history in the USA.  eugenics kind of saw its heyday in the early 1900s so forcible sterilization laws happens in some states.  And these are some of the players and people, you will hear out a lot in your readings so Charles davenport was a very big figure who in 1910 became the director of cold spring harbor which was very noted for its sort of eugenics.  Promotion and, like the conferences that had.  When we bother with the American proponent of the intelligence test.  And he was very much involved in sort of putting the intelligence testing that we think of associated with IQ and stuff into place we'll talk a lot more about that in weeks apart.  Madison grant was.  A big influencer in New York City, who really tried to direct immigration policy behind the scenes politically.  Even Margaret sanger who was part of making the first birth control clinic in the US, and I can 16 the motivation for that was eugenics and not letting on fit poor people.  procreate.  In buck first is about there was sterilization of carry Bach who was considered to be like a third generation on fit person and the Supreme Court sided with it being okay sterilize her.  It wasn't until 2014 in California that westernization.  So, and this is an example of a poster.  From that that era, saying that some people are born to be a burden.  So the thinking of that time was very entrenched in very powerful.  And so, in terms of safety, with.  Henry Goddard and his intelligence test there was actually a very famous manuscript he wrote about a family, where he characterized the family, many members of the family as being people lined that are on it.  And you know, the idea was that.  There should be a way to measure and classify intelligence, and so there was a test that had been developed by Alfred France, which was meant.  to sort of help with education of French children, but it got adopted and kind of turned into this aptitude test they've gotten used to the army during World War one.  And we'll talk more about this, but if you read some of the questions on the test right it's testing more of your societal knowledge, if you came from a privileged background, then it's actually testing sort of whether or not a person was in publishing.  But a very important idea that went along with ethics thinking was sort of a passion for quantifying okay and that's how eugenics seem to be really involved with the sciences.  So, as I mentioned, there are these different examples of institute institutionalization of eugenics with science, so you have people associated with Steve Kerr with her.  With the Museum of natural history you're with University College in London, all of these are prominent scientists who are seeking ways to.  Think about things like intelligence, think about traits that are superior in terms of statistical analyses and so there was a long history.  of trying to use statistical analyses to tell differences between racial groups, so I don't I tried to say that this was introduced.  In the 1800s people were very interested in measuring brain size or brain ball, you are school size or skull shape and using that as an indicator of differences between races or differences between the genders in terms of intelligence that.  That has been around for years, but what happens in the early 1900s is that new statistical methods were used to quantify intelligence tests that were already biased.  and literacy literacy tests right that were already bias and were considered to provide evidence that scientifically supports differences between different groups.  And one thing that I want to note here and thinking about this is that in some respects in the US, the idea of different races at this time was very much a moving target that.  It wasn't necessarily just race as black people versus white people there was the idea of race, as Jewish people versus Anglo Saxon people or Italians and southern Europeans versus northern Europeans Nordic races like it was used in whatever way was socially convenience.  It in this period, I mean it's still is right, but.  it's just important to remember that that's one additional reason why we can identify races, a social construct rather than the biological because society defines which group we want to other and they are the inferior race.  And so, in terms of statistical analyses, how did people try to make these qualifications.  you'll hear about some people that are really famous here.  So, first of all, God.  Created statistical models to compare traits between individuals from different races and classes, so he kind of was one of the first to do this.  And then, Karl Pearson yes, that person i'm actually publish and establish Mickey Mouse not.

**Felicity Crawford (00:53:05.220):**  discipline.

**Melisa Osborne (00:53:06.480):**  But he was actually a student of thoughts and he was actually held the Chair of eugenics at University College London.  And these are some of the quotes that come from his work, so in 25.  He had this paper we published the problem of immigration into Great Britain and an examination of Russian and Polish Jewish.  And so, he.  expressed very anti Semitic thoughts in his work.  Saying that Jewish population is inferior physically and mentally to native populations.  Additionally, there was Fisher who was also another statisticians he developed a Nova test that people use, he was also the golden professor of eugenics is.  The editor of the journal, and he basically, this is a quote available site technology provides a firm basis for believing that the groups of mankind differ in their innate capacity for intellectual and emotional development and so there's another idea.  We talked about when they asked him his classification system and how he kind of put groups into the different races and kind of said they had these.  unchangeable characteristics right just here, if you are calling something and innate capacity to become unchangeable right.  So these things all get added.  On to this foundation.  has already been there for justifying.  Scientific racism.  And so.  In thinking about this, as I mentioned, like the first loss for this request the 1970s.  You enter the World War Two era and eugenics thinking was used to justify Nazi extermination campaigns, and so this idea.  Was practiced historically at that time, a lot, but there are still examples today and so that's part of why we're doing case studies is because we want to think about.  These thoughts through the lens of the modern day and sort of how these foundations have actually been very pernicious right and hard to remove because they're so entrenched in.  US popular thought and and scientific institutions.  You know the list of how.  How many institutions that we still have today as sort of the leading institutions of science right had people entrenched in the thinking.  At their heart and directing their policies and their institutions.  So all of that is super happy.  I want to ask her any questions.  So.  What I want to point out now is despite all that glue despite all those foundations that we're still dealing with.  They were setting goals is to this day, there are dissenting voices to this map, and so I just want to mention right wow it's very interested in the scientific community.  There were many people at that time it's a sentence.  One such person do I have a lot of admiration for his friends.  So he was a leading apologists at that time he wrote tons of letters trying to counter the policy developments that davenport that Osborne we're trying to pass in the United States Congress.  Like there were a couple of condition reports that bolus agreed to participate in and just so he could be the dissenting voice that know these ideas are not founded, you know science is being misappropriated.  In order to try to support this model, and so I love this quote from him my ideas have developed, because I am when I am and I have lived where I have lived and that actually is not.  The bcs bowl is is that he was.  He was originally from Germany he emigrated to the US, he was a professor, but he traveled around the world, visiting all types of cultures of things I believe he spent some time with the Inuits in Alaska and one thing that is remarkable about this thing.  Is that rather than put how he grew up and what his background was like as being the superior way to grow up and the superior way to exist.  He was like no other cultures just do it differently and it's fascinating to see how people do it differently, and there is no superior.  person superior culture people adapt to where their lives, he was so able to see the similarities between humans and his anthropology anthropological work it's a remarkable.  and actually I found this podcast about him to be really uplifting because it was like a breath of fresh air about someone who really.  You know, believe in these things at the people that he mentored.  He didn't do not just works, so he mentored zora neale hurston at Barnard she's a prolific author from the early 1920s, she was an anthropologist they got a guggenheim fellowship to studying in the West Indies.  and his list of mentees reflects so much more diversity and inclusion.  People today honestly he mentored women better women of color.  So he was presenting voice and a time that was very dark.  also works is.  That often talked about in terms of evolutionary theory, so I don't know how many of you have heard of the scopes trial, have any of you heard of that.  Few Okay, so this was a very famous trial that happens in Tennessee in the 1920s.  and basically.  The beacons here so 1925.  This was a there was a lot to see that hey backpacks about against teaching human evolutionary biology, so there was nothing in this law about teaching evolution in general but.  It kinda like it kind of came from one of those fundamental misunderstandings of evolution.  So you know, one of the popular things that people that were against teaching human evolution would say was like people didn't come from chimpanzees we talked about that as a you know misrepresentation of how evolution works.  And so, still it led to this challenge that's teaching evolution.  And there were some very famous lawyers that have been involved so Clarence darrow was one of them, William Jennings Bryan can run for President of the US all like four times at this point, and this was really actually Brian last last thing he actually died days after the trial.  But it was it's been so popularized in culture there's movies about this stuff.  And, most of the focus on this and, like it was this way for me when I learned about it was all the evolution.  Oh people against evolution represented by Brian or first the people that will for evolution represented by darrow and like you know it was about.  People in Tennessee wanting to hold things back by not teaching evolution.  Well, interestingly.  The textbook.  At the Center of this trial.  actually have white supremacist eugenics theories President.  And so, actually, I never thought of this before, but in some respects the objection to teaching human evolution, as it was presented in this textbook came from objecting to teaching human evolution through this eugenics left.  So the people that were on the side of not teaching this model evolution, they were actually objecting to the eugenics thought here as well, which is something I never really knew or it was even mentioned when I learned about it in high school.  So actually the lawyer.  When odds with you next week lately after the trial before American biologists third ward off right.  So this is a really interesting aspect.  Of this particular trial, but it wasn't actually just about evolution, it was about evolution being used to support eugenics and those are two different things right.  So this is the model that we're left with going into World War Two and this model supports a lot of really bad stuff.  And so.  This is what we're going to ethics for today but.  Next week we're going to continue thinking about this in the post World War Two there and.  When we get into post World War Two with the DNA and things right.  What we really find is that, in terms of DNA we actually do.  A lot of DNA because of our recent origins from Africa, so this goes along with what we talked about the skin pigmentation right that's the variance or share because, in fact, there is, we migrated rather recently in terms of you know, biological time from one geographic location.  And so, these genetic differences that we do see some of they are account for what, but not all the physical variation you can see her assess and so we're going to pick up with this whole floor byline next week.  And sort of talk about.  The model.  Not the model, the.  what's it called in the paper blinking but it's like the reference hit the human reference gino so we're going to talk about the human reference genome and what people have in common across genetics next.  So there is light at the end of the tunnel.  Even though this eugenics thought is very pernicious still exists.  And so yeah so like I said we're going to talk about more of all time low side traits next week whole genome analysis, so when I say more will tell us, I trade we're going to talk more about the intelligence stuff because intelligence is actually very complicated.  And we're going to talk about.  Full genome analyses, now that that's something that happens all the time and then we're going to talk about the use and misuse of these in the modern era.  And so, for Thursday look over the case studies, think about which one you'd like to do.  And of course I accept this Friday will discuss the assignment and breaking groups to talk about which case studies you all want to do.  And if you have any questions about that, please feel free to email me or or Ping me or that kind of thing.  Okay, and this is a later Fox and we'll get back to this.  Thank you all very much.

**Felicity Crawford (01:07:00.330):**  me listen.

**Melisa Osborne (01:07:02.670):**  Listening without.

**Felicity Crawford (01:07:05.880):**  just saying hi Fred.

**Melisa Osborne (01:07:10.950):**  yeah.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:07:14.880):**  hi hi hi hi hi.

**Felicity Crawford (01:07:17.490):**  Are you doing Fred.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:07:20.220):**  Did you guys see that will be goldberg code.

**Melisa Osborne (01:07:25.620):**  yeah I.

**Felicity Crawford (01:07:27.540):**  got suspended for.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:07:29.250):**  Yes, but if there was an article in the glow by very conservative right there he's opinion writer op ED page Jeff colby.

**Felicity Crawford (01:07:40.740):**  See.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:07:41.340):**  Google article on um.  What races, because you know she was saying it's not it wasn't racism and she took a lot of.  Feedback because it was racism and.  And then.  So she she she's fine I mean there's nothing wrong what we go where, but the idea is that to her racism is only if it's a people of different color treated differently, and I think it expands the idea to having the students realize that racism is against any ethnic group.

**no speaker (01:08:26.790):** and

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:08:29.250):**  Then she went on Steve co bear and double down so it's worth talking about now.  It is worth talking about so I sent a Melissa.  link to the jacoby paper and a route to somebody talking about the cold air show.  I think I think it was interesting and I think it would go.  It would be it could be a topic to talk about a little bit and also Charles Turner I remember the.  I remember reading about his work, because you know it was discovered that he was one of the earliest African Americans that ever received a PhD and he did the work, but we had in our department somebody named Charles Turner I thought that was you know.

**Melisa Osborne (01:09:21.210):**  Well, his works remarkable but yeah that's why that's why I tried to make the point about racism moving target because that's exactly what I need when I when I say that is that you know different people that they define it based on sort of their.  Their social views in their background.  And you know and for her that she doesn't consider that.  You know that but.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:09:52.650):**  Yes, it's prejudice and.  I thought it was interesting I thought it was an interesting thing that that had come out.  And yeah.  You know it's worth having I think the class, so what happens in this there were only about four or five of us online, so the rest of them are in class or they listened to it independently.

**Melisa Osborne (01:10:16.170):**  yeah.  So pretty much the room school.  So I think most everybody's here.  So.  really good.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:10:26.250):**  So that's great that's good so yeah it works out okay i've been listening to your your posted ones, what I can do that.  How you doing today how are you.

**Felicity Crawford (01:10:41.430):**  yeah Thank you so it's always good to be in the class.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:10:46.200):**  yeah it's good it's Nice..  yeah I think.

