---
---

# Discussion

**Date:** 2/17/2022

**no speaker (00:00:08.220):** service.

**Adam Labadorf (00:00:57.660):**  yeah.  yeah.  Chakra all the way up their game.  Last night I absolutely.  love.  That.  I was closed.  So.  We were, I guess, we were able to turn the volume up.

**Melisa Osborne (00:01:46.920):**  Sorry.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:50.130):**  Good, no, no, it was it was too quiet well I just I just realized why it was too quiet because.  That was too quiet that's Maybe I should turn it down.

**Melisa Osborne (00:02:01.500):**  Okay.

**Adam Labadorf (00:02:04.650):**  We were.  testing out the video we're gonna show the short version of the video France.

**Melisa Osborne (00:02:10.800):**  Oh great.

**Adam Labadorf (00:02:12.870):**  You want to introduce.

**Melisa Osborne (00:02:17.310):**  Just yeah sure.  I mean.  I can't do that.  Not a problem so.

**Adam Labadorf (00:02:32.430):**  I like to say that I am so impressed with the.  Progress of.  The day.  In the case of that divided up this is not his responsibility, he attended every session last semester, when this was first started is the person who is.  You know the driving force behind the technology perusal the annotated papers, and this is an interesting as that goes well beyond what has been asked that so it's really quite special thrill it.  has one has.  It and i'll give you that you pull up a little bit about your background.  As well Fred you go on singing Thank you so much for that kind introduction to make sure my phones off we go.  yeah, thank you for that Melissa you can introduce me to, and then I can introduce myself and make sure that, like all the stories are straight.  line.

**Melisa Osborne (00:03:42.810):**  I know you're on.

**Adam Labadorf (00:03:45.510):**  This would be sort of like the star chart thing that we have like you have to ask other people where they.  Think of you, because you don't know what other people interview um yeah so i'm not allowed, or if I am an assistant professor in neurology.  But I am a card carrying violin from addition I got my PhD here i'd be from bioinformatics in 2016 and since then i've stayed on doing way too many things, this being one of them, but i'm the director of the bio informatics master's program some view well, those of you who know me.  I also serve as Director of bioinformatics for the va ptsd brain bank and so that's a veterans Affairs Department of veterans affairs government.  And they are generating a large amount of data, out of brain donations have collected over the years for people who have ptsd and my primary research interest is in neuro degeneration study, primarily the postmodern human brains.  And so I do genomics transcript omics all that but.  As you might might be aware, all of that work uses the human genome dot Human Genome and all throughout all my research i've had this sort of nagging question like.  That there are ethical implications, but I was unaware of my work because I download that fast to file this file, you can download the human genome it's open it's free.  But as soon as you start using it all these ethical implications are involved, like reaching them is it.  What does that mean when we compare one person's you know against that reference, what does that mean.  And today is actually the first lecture where we start talking about that issue, in particular, I think that that will nitty gritty of you know what does it mean to have a reference and what does it include and not include.  So that was my my scientific interest in in coming being involved in this class and but also just.  We as scientists, we have worse in a sort of unique position where we have you know we're trained in this objective set of tools objectives that tools is rigorous systematic way of inquiry.  For issues that touch many aspects of our society and so people, the public.  looks to us either for confirmation or this confirmation of some of their pre existing beliefs, and so we do have that power we have power.  And we need to build it responsibly and so that's kind of what this whole class is about is how do we as scientists use the power and knowledge that we have.  A responsible way and ethical way.  that's my whole spiel.  it's been an amazing experience working on this team, making this class, I mean it's it's not a science class as coming in a traditional sense as i'm sure many of you have noticed it touches on sociology and philosophy and economics and health and all sorts of things and so that's.  that's one of the qualities that attracts me to backgrounds, in the first place, is that you have to know all these things about all these areas of physics computer science biology chemistry.  And this class was just like and then all this other stuff too, and so it was really, really.  Really attractive and we have a fabulous team all that, all together, so that's that's me.  Melissa if you disagree feel free to voice your respective consent descent.  And so, with that.  i'm going to start sharing.  The slides, I guess, the first thing we're doing so the dedication right, so I should have put that out, so I made a mistake by using the person who's active research.  And i'm supposed to be picking people who are you know basically God.  And i'll do this ready, but I think it will be very helpful and I understand that this is about work last year that you can look somebody up and tell us, and I think that's even better, so you can send them to Professor well well.  So the Senator Professor asked one and maybe myself without picture we do the dedications and meeting up correctly that the person who I chose before thinking about that correctly, I was Sarah typical just want to tell you just a minute about.  The pictures and questions you'll always in biology or we're evolving our human species evolved she's answer that question, and she has done work.  With the same color that we've been talking about but also lactose intolerance.  And it's been it's really interesting to see how she's developed over the years, it was wonderful and one of the major papers that that we talked about.  Was with a graduate student That was our teaching felt for solid years in n Crawford normally listen to the quarter, and so it she's very special and, at the end talk today.  I thought she introduces fashion back into it and just an interview, but if we played right after the talk and the first question, the gentleman asked is a little bit about yeah as well, but yeah try it started there and see what happens.  Alright, so let's see.  listener.  Once I just said.  Please hold.  Okay, I think there's well there's someone I wasn't sharing the song, so the people on zoom couldn't hear the sound.  So so first question, this is really putting.

**no speaker (00:10:27.360):** My national precision medicine hat on I think it's incredible that you have dedicated your career to doing something very difficult, which is the easiest thing actually is not easy was easier, is to stay wherever your Institute is and we are genetics over there.

**Felicity Crawford (00:10:47.850):**  it's just the path of least resistance I what what made you do the you know crazy and much other thing of engaging with communities across the world and.  And really saying it's kind of a crazy idea right leaving leaving your comfort zone and saying i'm just going to make a long term bet and alone.  takes a huge amount of upfront effort before you start seeing rewards much later well that's a great question, and so, first, I give you an idea how crazy, it was.  You know, when I started this I was a faculty Member at university of Maryland.  I had no experience doing field work I didn't you know I actually have an anthropology degree so part of the answer is.  When I was an undergraduate I had an anthropology and a genetics degree and i've always had a passion for studying.  Human evolution and, frankly, I always wanted to do field work, but when I was at Yale in the Medical School doing my grads you know my.  PhD research there's no way my advisor was letting me out of the lab so I, it was my passion, I couldn't wait to go to Africa, I was so excited and I love it, I mean there's I just for certain people I mean.  I don't know for people like me and for others in my lab and our collaborators we love doing that work.  But when I first went out there, I had no idea what I was doing never did field work didn't know anything one by myself.  Okay, all by myself out there lit up a research team and we basically practice on ourself in the lab and we just try to like practice the different methods.  And at the time we didn't have a generator but I figured that we're not going to have electricity, so I custom ordered a centrifuge that could get hooked into the car battery.  And we just kind of learned, as we went along and i'm always like frankly amazed that this actually worked as well as it did.

**no speaker (00:12:36.720):** But to me it's not you have to have a passion, I mean that's that's it and, basically, you have to be genuinely passionate and interested. In this and it's just like because it's sort of the area that was the least explored, I feel like we're constantly discovering completely new things. And it's not like, we have to go to Africa to do this right there plenty of populations in Asia and other places of the world where you can also discover very new things.

**Adam Labadorf (00:13:03.300):**  Okay, so passion matters.  Say better and.  I probably shouldn't endorse this not do endorse it one of my like my guiding principles is it's easier to ask forgiveness than permission.  I can't suggest you guys go off and do that stuff but it's how I operate, just like you know if something seems like a good idea, just go for it, I mean as long it's not gonna hurt anybody.  You hope.  we're recording this i'm in trouble.  But really I mean a lot of things can happen if you just do them like instead of if you ask first then you're putting someone else in the position to have to say yes or no, but it might have been fine and that's a different question.  And, fortunately, hopefully, you find ways to to enable you'll find ways to enable your passions, you know, one way or another.  Alright, so first thing.  we're going to go over.  The superior reading we're going to divide into groups, I guess, because you guys have been doing this kind of freeform right self select.  i've added some pages to this there's no book that you guys have been using to.  Everybody cool.  I split it into two as often because I thought you know the the superior readings were kind of self contained, and then the lewington stuff was also kind of self contained himself.  We can see how this works, but then I asked different questions for the readings there.  So I guess now's the time you would say, please self organizing and discuss.  So.  Welcome back, thank you.  Alright, so this was the annotation reading for today, this is one of the more landmark papers, I would say in human genetics human understanding of human variation across the planet.  It was published in 2015 but this 1000 genomes honey, have you heard of the thousand genomes project consortium part of this one here cool on thousand genomes project we started in 2008, I think, seven, eight somewhere around there.  has been so it's been going on for a long time, and this was you know, in contrast to the human genome project, this is the thousand genomes genome project.  we've now gone on to complete I think we've completed projects for the hundred thousand genome project and now there's the million plus genome project underway, so we.  won't find by factors of 10.  But this was the first attempt to address this question it's very loaded sort of question about what is the variability of the human genome across representative groups or what was thought to be representative groups geographically dispersed groups.  i'm just going to go through some of the figures I just talked about briefly what they work on some of them are clearer than others, but these were the main findings and so it's this was the first real like this is basically tells you.  The most important findings of the whole study.  And we'll break this down they sampled something like 20 some odd different populations are individuals from these places, I actually i'm not sure how they.  selected them like individuals from Great Britain, but they just people that live in Great Britain or the people who they thought had ancestry in Great Britain i'm not sure how they selected this.  Maybe I think it was like one or two generations, or something some sort of recent time horizon they selected people who were from those parts of the world.  And within them, they sequence their genomes using a number of different techniques, the ones that were available at the time, where the so called short read sequencing data set so because heard of short route sequencing anyone, no one.  Totally fine.  that's like that's what I teach his shirt sequencing analysis so um.  But it hasn't obviously it's not everywhere it's a it's a type of data generation reject, we can generate data from nucleotides DNA basically on a large scale, unbiased so you can, in principle, sample any DNA molecule in a sample.  Simultaneously, at the same time.  Well, so they pick some number of individuals from each of these populations, they generated sequencing data and they assemble those that sequencing did to determine.  phased deployed genomes for each person so i'll talk about what phase two and phase means appetites.  In this context, later.  But, given these large sequences the whole genomes they can start looking at how they vary across all these different populations.  And, in particular, the very locations that they're most interested in and most able to detect with the DNA sequencing technology that they use for the so called single nucleotide variance.  They were able to detect larger variance but the vast majority of the variants that were detected worse single nucleotide are very small.  And you can sort of think of this as like.  An enormous matrix right where the columns there are all the different positions in the genome that vary anywhere across population that in the Rose they're individuals do they have that variance or not sort of think of it that way.  So you can look across these populations and see which populations are represented for any given real.  Some of them will have, and then, some of them will have.  will be represented by multiple populations, the group the dark Gray wedges here indicate the proportion of variance.  That were detected in that population but also across all the other continents, individuals and all the other companies continents also had those variants so already, we can see that.  Depending on the population.  More than half of the variance found a population are not specific to that content.  or found another confidence as well.  So and Gray.  or just shirts, are all confidence sorry the dark race everywhere every different population separated by many 10s of thousands of years, many.  thousands of miles those variants were found everywhere, but it seems, at least one person in every continent that's our sort of universal human shared ancestry you might think that that way.  The light Gray ones are variants that were found in at least two continents so still geographically dispersed the light colored.  ones wedges were very specific to that continent and the the darker colored ones are specific to each individual population.  And what is.  It looks like they.  Are the head of mistake.  or being rich and this will be darkening.  Well there's no stuff.  Anyway, it's not it's fine, but it should have been dark green.  But what we can tell right away, is that the sliver that's unique to each population is.  Among the smallest, if not the smallest which the largest proportion of every population is either darth vader like right.  And that is the visual way of depicting that you know 85% of population is observed within of variance is observed within populations, because the same variance are detected all across the world.  But depending on where you're from you may have more private variance things that are more specific more local, so there are also private local differences.  And this is just a very pretty summary summary of that.  This is another way of depicting a similar the same data on the left.  is so each little cross isn't individual the y axis is the number of millions of various founded each person's genome relative to.  Another whole reference genome.  And what's very striking is that the genomes and Africa have far more variance in them, then genomes and other parts of the world.  that's how we interpret that.  And that there are some individuals and genomes that have adversity or range of the number of various but then.  On the right here, these are singleton's they don't actually define singleton in the paper anywhere I looked for it, but I think singleton's just means they were the private facilities, like the dark ages from the previous map.  And again in Africa, not consistently but on average African populations have more private very unsafe and variants only found in those populations than in the other groups, but nonetheless, there are still lots and lots of private variance in each one of these populations.  There so far.  So quick note about habla types that we don't have appetite means some Okay, well, I have blood type refers to, and please correct me if i'm a divided Community sites in my language, I know what apple type is but I mean I described the well.  The habit, I have the type is the sequence of variance the DNA sequence that corresponds to the same molecule the deployed organism.  And so, each of us has two copies of each chromosome each chromosome has you know all the genes and that one particular molecule may have has some combination of variants on it right.  The appetite is having that information, this is one this was like the key.  Calm that edwards had with Lewis study was not taking any of the holotype information like which variance move with which parents right because they didn't have that information or they didn't take it as perhaps.  This study they tried to do this as best as they try to figure out which parents went along with other games on the same molecule and therefore you can more accurately estimate.  inheritance college.  And so they did this, this is actually really difficult to do confidently that has to generate three different types of data I won't go into how they work.  But it's in general, with the types of technologies that they had it's challenging to do this because.  Because of just the nature of the beast it's getting easier with so called longer read DNA sequencing technologies for.  The longer the individual molecule sequence, the more confident you can be that variants move together, but they didn't have that technology at the time, so they did the best that they could.  And so, this is the big obligatory summary paper of results that they had broken out by continent and.  They just listed out the various statistics.  That they observed for each of their.  son populated populations right, so the 661 samples know different areas of samples of coverage, it has to do with.  How many times they sequenced each part part of the genome.  And this largely.  follows what they said so far, namely in Africa, there are more simplified variants then in the other continent populations and these these different the different next rows and here are.  Instances about the potential consequences or function of these different variants so in dells are small, like three two more two more two or more their various of length two or more nucleotides a snip is one nucleotide in del is like two to five or 10.  Large deletions are larger parts of the dean of the size of some point hoppy number variations different parts of the genome can be papi.  invitation events so you have multiple copies of the same region, these are all retro transpose on retro transportable elements if you're not aware, at least 50% of the human genome, is made up of retro transpose on interest possible elements repetitive elements.  And these down here nonce anonymous anonymous does anyone know what that means, nobody likes that.  These.  These rows indicate what the consequence of mutation is on the protein that the genes code for a synonymous mutation is, if you remember your.  poetry translation code on table there are multiple code ons that code for the same amino acid synonymous mutations don't change the protein sequence non anonymous mutations do change the amino acid in the protein sequence some of the many of these are.  Many other variants most of the variants were founded in trance.  And I want to say one.  Protein protein there's, no, no, it isn't.  exactly this the electrons are excited I was transcripts and they don't go on to make proteins exactly and so there's more tolerance for variants and insurance and there isn't axons and then.  untranslated regions promoter regions for controlling jeans and so on.  And the pattern of Africa, having a larger abundance of these things hold up here as well, so they have the most of these different dispositions greater diversity, but the patterns are the same.  So it, I find it so much striking that there's 100 times more variants that have no effect, then there are there's only 12,000.  variants that actually affect the protein which also kind of makes sense right proteins are have function or under selective pressure and so there's not all that much difference between us functionally right it's one of the one of the things we can drop in this.  12,661 individuals across with seven different populations and the only time 12,000 variants across all of them that are different.  To me that's one of the things that says, you know what do the differences mean, most of them mean nothing.  that's particularly.  In this analysis I do I just added the the first finger on top, just to help even this they did a somewhat complicated statistical analysis to like cluster do they do so called.  Population stratification that's what the name of the analysis is basically looking for different distinct groups of populations and they.  It is an a de Novo, is it makes no assumptions, which is clusters and ask the data, what are the best closers and they find this clustering with a cluster is that roughly shows that you know the dark.  The dark followers respond to those private population private variants.  But as you move along geographically, there is a mixture between populations and geography that there's a gradation amongst these different populations, based on what they're cooler similar to you so just the data itself.  Forward told us information that is.  confirmatory that confirms, or at least supportive of this no great diversity shared across all human populations that's all this is really saying.  And this is interesting, so this in this bit by analyzing the pattern of mutations that they see between different populations.  They can estimate.  how large the populations were at different times in the past.  And so what this plot is from left to right this is number of thousands of years in the past.  This is roughly the current size of the population and that y axis is the size of the inferred size of the population.  And the thing that we noticed is that you know, maybe somewhere between 10,000 150,000 years ago.  or 200,000 years ago population sizes across the globe vomited estimated colors and sizes so right here.  Something really bad happened on the planet and humans are not having a really great time and then eventually whatever that condition was that caused this planet in a population size went away and then populations were were able to start growing in size good.  Now this is just.  You know somewhere between 10,000 50,000 years ago I thought I would look to see what might what might that be so I said well when was the last Ice Age last period was from 915,000 to about 11,000 which is like kind of like right here.  And so maybe that's what happened, maybe those as ice age, this is entirely speculation on my part, I just happened to notice that this glacial age was going on at the same time that are a third population size is planted.  But the point being, though, is that the inferred size of the afternoon populations.  Was not nearly as low days not suffer.  As much as populations and other parts of the world, and you know much of the other parts of the world or North and South, so.

**Melisa Osborne (00:32:35.940):**  So Adam.  yeah so I was actually just reading today in MENA just Joe bloggs skis book that the period from 2.5 million to 10,000 years ago was a challenging time for most of the world's mammals.  So there you go.  hashtag evidence.

**Adam Labadorf (00:32:54.750):**  All right.  Well, I mean assuming cheap.  Depending on what her evidence was.

**Melisa Osborne (00:33:02.970):**  Well, I mean I know you guys can't see me but there's like the evidence here man.

**Adam Labadorf (00:33:10.470):**  written in a book.

**Melisa Osborne (00:33:11.460):**  If there's lots of citations further book it's really good.

**no speaker (00:33:15.510):** Oh.

**Melisa Osborne (00:33:16.860):**  So.

**Adam Labadorf (00:33:18.690):**  Sorry five probably non human animals in the room.  I didn't mean to leave you out but I mean it was really about the things to.  Could we do this with other animals, did you do the exact same thing, there are no other mammals that are that are as widespread as humans, so I guess.  Right.  Put the thought.  And the main takeaway of this analysis was that you know this analysis suggests that.  About 300 300 generations ago.  existed, the median common ancestor of everyone so everyone in this room had an incident at the same ancestor.  About 300 generations ago.  And depending on you know which part of the world, you may be from with population might be part of the shared common ancestor is actually a lot.  More reasons than that.  And so what this this concept which is kind of mind blowing right, how can everyone be descended from the same individual well, you can reason about that.  But this this notion of everyone sharing a common ancestor is called this genetic basis point idea that a theory Melissa or is it just a.

**Melisa Osborne (00:34:39.810):**  I don't know actually I think it's a very.

**Adam Labadorf (00:34:44.310):**  it's a very I mean can we test it.

**Melisa Osborne (00:34:46.530):**  or actually actually though an ISO point is like you know the melting point or the boiling point right, if you think about it so.  same right it's just a definition.

**Adam Labadorf (00:35:01.200):**  Right, so what whether Whether you call it whatever you call it um there's this concept that we were all descended from the same ancestor one individual at some point in time and that's what this analysis suggests.  If you'd like to know more about the advisor points.  That are not bird has a really great.  description of that.  So That was all I was going to go over there's a couple of the figures in the paper they're a little bit dense I didn't really want to spend time on it, so any questions about.  those parts of the paper that I mean I think those are the main points right, this is the data more modern data backing up this finding that losing had 1972 that's still largely consistent, so you know, obviously can't say 85% no one percentage depends on who you are and.  If there's no questions and let's break into groups again and we'll actually do our analysis.  that's not what I wanted yeah.  Most of your.

**no speaker (00:36:22.830):** Life yes.

**Melisa Osborne (00:36:25.650):**  Oh Do I need to make a gym.

**Adam Labadorf (00:36:27.930):**  I don't know.

**Melisa Osborne (00:36:29.130):**  I didn't make one yet.

**Adam Labadorf (00:36:30.510):**  But you guys remember we've done.  Some I don't remember what do you make a new one, for every class.

**Melisa Osborne (00:36:38.550):**  yeah I do.  Alright, so here.

**Adam Labadorf (00:36:48.390):**  Do you make them inside the.

**Melisa Osborne (00:36:53.100):**  yeah So if you go to the spring 2020 folder under activities there's discussion jam boards and then you would make a new one.  Then there's a template now, so you can actually just copy the template and then title it for the day.

**Adam Labadorf (00:37:13.980):**  tried.

**Melisa Osborne (00:37:16.380):**  i'll do it right now and then we can figure out the logistics next.

**Adam Labadorf (00:37:19.440):**  Well, here, you can you can look at what into on a to pause recording.

**no speaker (00:37:24.600):** yeah.

