---
---

# Discussion

**Date:** 3/1/2022

**no speaker (00:00:08.160):** Good.

**Adam Labadorf (00:00:13.440):**  morning.

**no speaker (00:00:32.160):** me.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:13.980):**  Over.  time you know.  it's your course and we'll do it anyway.  amazing work.  You know who.  I just want to know, without each.  Other.  Get the just want to make sure we do this, all takes place you.  know.  So you know I try to keep it to the poor.  And covered the one thing I was thinking, if I could cover.  All your stuff so after I finish the average American express I don't know lessons up on it, the only thing.  The biggest concern is that even further, we.  can cover the insurance.  Obviously it's really important, and yet it doesn't.  Get anxious about their mind oh we'll make sure we'll get him hey everybody.  Hello.

**no speaker (00:02:53.760):** hey.

**Adam Labadorf (00:03:01.290):**  Good.  evening Hello everyone.  First, I wanted to say apologize for going so far over last time I gave a discussion it's not going to happen again we're going to shoot for 1215 as usual.  When we this class is technically scheduled until like three or 330 or something I just kind of had that in my mind so we're going to stick to 12 to 15 as much as possible.  So let me.  share my screen.  i'm trying.  To make this thing go away.  And I wanted to go.  yeah yeah that's what I was trying to do, but doesn't seem to be doesn't seem to be cooperating.  No.  Well it's not working.  I can't do it can't do it control alt shift ah.  There we go cool.  Alright, so today we're going to cover a little bit of the history of intelligence testing know where it came from what are its foundations and intersect with some of the modern day in our modern sensibility.  But intelligence testing and why it's possibly so fraught of a topic.  Though before we dive in today dedication, is for is to David knight upon he was around in 1872 1867 and he was so I looked this up, he was an aboriginal man of the.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez & Suzelle (00:05:28.290):**  Ordinary.

**Adam Labadorf (00:05:29.160):**  People I think that's how they pronounced it I looked it up, it was now South Australia here Adelaide and he was was an inventor a writer and activist and a preacher very accomplished person and was is recognizes the first published aboriginal offer.  But, and he is known his first book was this book myths and legends of the aborigines published in 1930 and unfortunately this other.  Scottish art or William Ramsay Smith, is the primary author on the book, even though it's thought that David wrote, most of it.  So another one of our sort of forgotten heroes.  Is today's dedication.  Alright, so intelligence testing, this is related to the readings we're not going to talk we're not going to discuss the superior readings for just kind of discuss the the annotation paper in the second half of class.  But I thought, if we're going to go over sort of the background that led to this sort of inquiry that we that we've made that we make our scientific establishment into what is intelligence, how do we measure it and why is that important.  So thinking back to our linen taxonomy the original publication of this taxonomy.  subdivided humans into four broad groups, and not only were they described phenotypically but their natures where there are instances where made about their their temperaments as well, and as we've seen, not surprisingly.  linnaeus being a European and to put Europeans at the top of the hierarchy and assigned, of course, only.  You know, positive attributes to all the white people and not as positive attributes to everyone else, and of course Africans were at the bottom of the hierarchy, from the very beginning.  And so, with this backdrop people scientists began to apply the scientific methods to try to quantify.  intelligence in these various groups and they came up with a number of at the time, which seemed potentially reasonable approaches so Paul broke on particular.  He studied skulls and bones, who was an anthropologist and an archaeologist where he would study skulls and try to measure various aspects about the spells painting arbitrary.  phonology by their aspects about the skull that can infer something about the intelligence of the person when that person was alive.  Cobra was a proponent of apologizing and in case you.  don't remember what that term means that it's the idea that humans mind humans arose independently and many different parts of the world.  And therefore not you know necessarily biologically are genetically related as opposed to monogenic ISM, which is the idea and the truth of the matter, that all humans arose from a single.  evolutionary line and therefore we're all related.  And, and so bravo they started coming up with these you know semi quantitative methods for quantifying the size of skulls, and so there was this these devices that they would use to sort of draw.  skulls there are other people who would fill skulls with lead shots so little like beans type basically so you can still a skull.  With a certain amount of DVDs and then measure, the volume of the bs you can compare to that same thing for many styles and compare those measurements, this is what's called thing imagery and it was the approach that many people used.  to quantify.  As a correlate for intelligence and various other attributes of these humans, Francis galton than later.  was in very interested in estimating the intelligence of various racial and ethnic groups.  And you did this somewhat anecdotally with his own observations of traveling around the world, and from the observations of others.  By you know assessing the number and quality of intellectual achievements of different groups around the world, the percentage of eminent men, whatever that meant.  needs to the group's he argued that he started to quantify intelligence intelligence form of some sort of a normal distribution within each population.  But that the the averages between those normal distributions of intelligence were different between different populations.  Somehow he estimated that the ancient Greeks had the highest average intelligence, despite the fact that I think none of them were alive.  i'm not sure how you would make that determination, but he did, and then, of course, followed by a contemporary Englishman, with black Africans up lowest levels and Australian aborigines even lower.  no surprise, surprise the hierarchy that you interpreted, that is, that is analysis roots, if you call it that implied was directly in line with the lineage hierarchy so not really surprising.  It wasn't just.  Brain size or spell cranial volume that.  people try to use as a measurement of intelligence in this study that came out of the University of Pennsylvania in the late 1800s noted that.  White Americans had a slower reaction time on particular type of visit physical physical physical tests than Native Americans are African Americans and.  That those numbers those numbers are likely, you know, true to some degree, but their interpretation, of course, was that you know the slow reaction time must be because.  White Americans are just more contemplative they stopped and they think about what they do before they react to things that was their explanation.  And so they kind of further on suggests that lower rash and times of blacks imply inferiority of race and lower back sometimes women are in accordance with a higher brain development of men.  I mean, these were books, and these are common beliefs, at the time in in these circles So these are their words.  As a quick sidebar you all are reading this book superior by Angela say me she also wrote a book inferior, which is not about race, but about sex and now I haven't read it personally but Melissa I believe she has and it's very good.  So she says.  Alright, so we have this hierarchy that has been established during the scientific community, for a long time.  But there were always detractors and these detractors where you know say abolitionists in the United States.  Who who noted that there are incredibly intelligent no African American people of African descent Frederick douglass w E dubois among them, and these are cancer examples, how can these scientists, possibly claim that Americans are lower intelligence when they're clear conflicts apples.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (00:13:09.450):**  and

**Adam Labadorf (00:13:10.440):**  But in spite.  Of this.  These ideas persisted.  But you know nonetheless.  This idea of measuring intelligence eventually amounted to you know quantifying intelligence is rooted in this notion that.  i'm just going to read this this quote so my best guess to provoke you is that the largest phenomena, by far, is the general clash between people's legitimate family desires and employees.  Current desire for her car and intensity not sure what that means, but.  In the special case of science and engineering, there are issues of intrinsic aptitude and particularly of the variable variability of aptitude and that those considerations are reinforced by what are in fact lesser factors involving socialization and continuing discrimination.  This argument is that there is some kind of innate intelligence some intrinsic aptitude that each of us has, for you know being smart.  And that we have this innate attitude and that attitude can be quantified it's a number, and that is that is the underlying basis of these arguments and the thinking that went along with them.  So along those lines.  How many have heard of the semen vinay intelligence test of all.  It might have been the first was certainly one of the earliest attempt to sort of measure intelligence so did or didn't see him on an author vinay this was in France around the turn of the 20th century, the French Ministry of Education wanted a way.  For educators to distinguish between children who were simply lazy but had capabilities and children who were actually mentally retarded this was the term that they use at the time.  And the goal of this test was to predict the child's mental age in comparison with their chronological age.  So if there's a child.  Could responded to this battery of tests have a child who's six years old responded to this battery of tests in exactly the same way as all their six year olds and that suggests that their mental age is six consistent with their chronological age.  The The point of this test, though, was to identify children who weren't as as like who are just dropped developmentally behind with the goal of identifying those students and giving them more help to bring them up to this speed.  And then he himself warned that these results should not be assumed to measure innate intelligence, they should not be used to label individuals as smart or not permanently.  Nor should it be used as a filtration mechanism for stratified people into smart people and not smart people.  The test itself but was a measures five weighted factors.  consisting of both verbal and nonverbal cues so trying to measure, a range of different aspects of intelligence and this was, but this is largely the first and largest.  attempt at doing this.  So, to give you an idea, this was one of the questions that was asked on this test the question posed to the children are which of these two faces is the prettier.  I assume it means from the top left so you're picking a laughter right.  I will let you guys decide whether you think this is a reasonable question to ask a child.  But.  This is the sort of type of question that they might ask on these on these tests so highly subjective.  They even if in in today's case the intent was to help students are still know how do you actually make that assessment.  has a lot of subjectivity involved and as we'll see that's not specific to the single benign test.  So this really led to this notion of intelligence quotient or IQ IQ is this sort of number it's a reified number that's meant as a proxy for your intelligence.  The same Albany tasks was composed of a bunch of Sub tests so there's knowledge base quantitative reasoning spatial reasoning working memory and fluid reasoning which is sort of like thinking on your feet.  As opposed to crystallize reasoning, which is our crystallized intelligence, which is a product of your experience, so this is sort of like trying to get at this innate intelligence how smart, are you.  Smart are you.  And IQ today is still intended to compute some relative mental age, the chronological age and the way that it's actually still used today is.  A an IQ of 100 means that your mental abilities are the same as everyone else who's your age.  If you have a higher IQ than 100 that means based on this and other you are with a certain percentile of the older mentally older more advanced than a certain percentile of people who have taken the test and if your IQ is less than 100 likewise in that direction as well.  And this is how they currently work, so this is the, this is the basis, basically, is is how IQ is defined and how intelligence testing works, it is this disorder designed to assess the various aspects of your intelligence and turn them into a number to make it easy to make decisions.  It wasn't until the so but, but the name cautioned against using his test as the filtration mechanism, because he was aware that a stigma or the information could be misused in very nefarious ways to subdivide people and and unfiltered people.  It wasn't until.  Simone Simone bill, a task was introduced translated from French and English in 1910 and then brought to America that his fears actually came to pass.  So Henry he got hurt I don't I don't remember, if you have read about him yet, but he is a famous you genesis one of the driving forces behind eugenics in the United States in the late 18 or 1900s he published not only the.  This up the same on a test in English, but also this book The contact form on a study in the heredity of feeble mindedness now feeble mindedness.  Is was the term that was used for it to refer to any sort of collection of mental health issues developmental issues.  Basically undesirable or non normative traits I guess you might consider what neuro divergence, you can as nerd a virgin of magnitude of that now was labeled as people mindedness at the time.  And the point of this book was told a fictional a fictitious.  story.  was mostly fiction, it was rooted in individuals but.  But it was largely made up.  That follow this line of a family that to like the early 1800s where this upstanding citizen Martin caltech he was a war hero, and was coming back from war and he dallied with a feeble minded tavern girl was the hypothesis, thus creating two lines.  And, on the one the one family line gave gave rise to this people mindedness and all the children from having this dalliance with the feeble minded woman led to you know, a child.  That led to many more children who can't really read this.  10 children calm hundreds of the lowest types of human beings, this.  This page was included in a psychology textbook I believe I thought, and so this is not just the fringe thing it's an actual textbook.  Whereas, you know.  After this dalliance Martin Calafat married an upstanding quaker address and.  On that line all of the children were upstanding citizens intelligence successful.  So this notion of intelligence and linking it to genetics was was that has now taken on this sort of moral quality.  This moral dimension.  and  You know much later genealogists went back and they evaluated the story, and they found that it was mostly nonsense.  There was there was very little truth to any of it, and certainly not this moral genetic dichotomy as bartered painted.  But nonetheless this idea, a lot of power, it was kind of like convenient it sort of makes sense right like if you if you take for granted for us for truth.  Your intelligence is innate some quality about you then traits are passed on from what you are an eight, so why wouldn't intelligence as well, I would say the reasoning makes sense, but of course it was brought to.  Take into it cause suffering.  So this is a 1910 and then.  In World War one.  The world, one day, the United States didn't enter overwatch until 1917.  But there was entering World War one for a number of reasons, it was a declared war on the allies of the Germans or a bunch of reasons.  There were submarines attacking merchant ships for in the mid Atlantic, and so the America was finally drawn into this war so suddenly came this need to raise a very large army very quickly.  to adjust this fighting to go off and fight.  And the military became very interested in this intelligence testing the sort of innate capacity of individuals to decide now who should be flexible soldiers who should be.  officers and and who should be eliminated from service, all together, based on some sort of measure of intelligence and so that's what they did the army alpha report of the army mental tests, this was a large scale experiment conducted by.  Your gum and yours was putting this we published in 1920, but of course it was in progress from 1970 1918.  And the purposes of the tests were to eight instead of dating the mentally incompetent to classify men according to their mental capacity and to assist and selecting competent men for responsible positions, so this is a sorting mechanism and the filtration mechanism.  And I I can't say that the the idea here was not unreasonable like this is war, you want to send the right people to the right places.  Otherwise, you know, there could be lives lost, I think the rationale that they were trying to address the problem that they're trying to address was urgent, and it was.  You know I can't criticize them for wanting to be able to do this.  On.  and the report later on in the opinion of his office these reports very definitely.  indicate very definitely that the desired results have been achieved, so they felt.  And the that they had this test that they had developed for all the men who went into the service achieve these goals.  And they wanted they go on to say, the success of this work any large series of observation, so they did some number of 10s of thousands of.  army personnel recruits.  These large so large series of observation some 5000 officers and 80,000 men makes it reasonably certain that similar results may be expected if the system be extended to include the entire enlisted and draft personnel.  And all newly appointed officers, so they developed this test and they tested it in a small group of people, and someone cited.  That those results were pure it parties accurate enough, and so, then they started deploying this test all across the army.  So in this in the sense we started with this this goal of using a test coming out with a number to filter people because there was too many people to assess and too much risk they decided that it worked well and then they decided to take that result and apply a problem.  And this is largely how we approach these types of studies right you can't possibly studying everybody, and so you have to study a smaller number of people with the intent that those results generalize.  Of course, you know, there are caveats here, so your claim that the tests measured native intelligence this notion of innate intelligence, that we have some number basically visitation side of that is intelligence.  And not related to education or training, however, this is one of the questions that was all the tests so question 18 velvet Joe appears in advertisements of blank is it to power is a dragon dragons is a tobacco or is so.  And so happens that at the time, 1960s, there were these advertisements being spread like made around parts of the country or Belgium tobacco.  So the correct answers battle.  You might imagine that this would be a difficult question to answer if you first off didn't.  weren't exposed to these advertisements, or if you didn't read English very well, which.  was very many of the people who were recruited into the army.  And of course the later results were criticized is very fairly only measuring acculturation because the test scores nearly nearly quarterly to nearly exactly what the number of years stands in the US.  So the test was measuring something, but obviously it wasn't native intelligence, if you know how long how long you live in a country raised your test scores, but naturally on.  There were many prominent psychologists the genesis scientists who jumped on these findings to claim that people from Southern and Eastern Europe were less intelligent than native born Americans are immigrants.  Then they were Americans or immigrants from Nordic countries so from the north, for some reason.  And I black Americans were less intelligent white Americans.  They use this data to confirm their previously held beliefs, the same hierarchy that we've seen all along.  Based on some sort of an intelligence.  There were of course objections to this so don't you eat your boss dubois.  In races prison intelligence and 19 1920.  I mean it's worth reading so i'm just going to read it so for a century or more, is it has been the dream of those who do not believe Negroes are human that there, which should find some scientific basis.  negro brains measured without reference to age statue nutrition or cause of death would convince the world that black men simply could not be educated today scientists acknowledge that there is no weren't.  Then came psychology the children of the public schools were study and it was discovered that some color children right lower than like children.  This gay white satisfaction, even though it was pointed out that the average included most of both races and that, considering the educational opportunities and social.  Environment of the races, the differences were measurements simply of the ignorance and poverty of the black child surroundings today, however, all this out.  A worldly accurate scientific classification of brain power has been discovered and by none other than our student army officers, the results do you need to ask.  This.  trial that Columbia University assures us that the intelligence of the average of the negro is equal to that of a nine year old white boy, and that we should arrange our educational program to make.  As such, is it conceivable that a great university should employ a man whose science consists of such butter rot.  And these are my words that are WB dubois but.  There were obvious detractors people who noticed how ridiculous, this was at the time, too, so.  Fortunately, we have that.  But these ideas to not go away.  Even as late no so Arthur Jensen who's a psychologist uc Berkeley.  suggested that this gap in intelligence test scores between black and white students might be rooted in genetic differences, so the same old story between innate intelligence.  And genetics and, as with eugenics these ideas related to policy, this is where the real damage was done, because these ideas persistent, not only in people's minds, but also in the structures that were implemented in our society to that reflected them.  So let's go over this argument right the logic of these arguments, is that intelligence is innate therefore intelligence is genetic, because how else would it be an eight.  Therefore it is fixed because you can't change your jeans and therefore why bother trying to help people with low intelligence, but it has been the money on people who will benefit, this is the argument that is often me i'm using this type of lightning.  But and so really what this is talking about these concepts are biological or Genetic determinism, which is what we just described, like your biology and your physical your genetics and your physiology determine your behavior 100%.  that's biological determinism social determinism is the opposite of that where our human behavior is determined entirely by environmental interactions.  And so, this is the classic nature versus nurture debate.  which still wages today and the reading that you did.  speaks like participates in that debate.  And this is just a funny a funny joke cartoon Eureka i've discovered the gene that makes us think that everything is determined by genes.  So this idea of course persists and, but it is just about as ridiculous as thinking, there is a gene to think to thinking that there is a gene for everything.  But of course now hopefully we all seem to be much wiser and that intelligence is not one number it's not an eight there are all sorts of different types of intelligence.  there's a spatial and nationalist and musical intelligence interpersonal linguistic bodily kinesthetic so it's moving around.  And so the whole idea of trying to distill your innate intelligence down to a number such that you can be compared to other people was fundamentally flawed at its root because.  There are simply there's simply no single number, though we still like to think that way.  Because it's convenient.  and  There are of course all sorts of environmental influences on what we perceive as our intelligence and the scores that come out of these tests.  And, but there is no variation among these IQ scores amongst individuals even, but there is greater variation within each of our populations, that is, between all the populations, we call rates.  Which is a I mean we saw that before too we saw that in the genetics right the thousand units project we saw the same thing there's variability.  Within populations that is much greater than between populations and there's no end to the environmental factors that can affect the the outcomes that we that we have.  Our health and nutrition and our the amount of education that we that was available to us, or socio economic environment, the tests themselves are biased they and and this so there's many, many different environmental influences, which is not to say that genetics, have no effect.  Right that's kind of what the reading was about.  Is that there is evidence that there is some genetic effects.  But as we, as we saw in the paper as we'll discuss that in fact is very, very small relative to the environmental effects we observed.  It does one sort of nail in the coffin of IQ testing it's the so called flame effect.  James Flynn noticed that IQ test scores overall for our entire society we're increasing over time, if it was meant to measure something innate, how can I change in the population over time when there's not nearly enough time for us to evolve genetically.  to the point where you know, the average IQ of a person in 1917 with a mouse only 73 on today's IQ so the average person would have been considered feeble minded or close there too um if applied today your grandparents would be would have a lower IQ just on average than we do.  So this reflects the sort of interaction between know the test and our our environment, I mean if you can learn to have a better IQ can't really measure something and made it.  And so, this is the last slide for the beginning part of lecture.  So the bell curve which Fred has much more direct experience with the debate that occurred over this book.  The bell curve was a book published in 1994 by Stephen Murray, and it basically in a very it was is one of the most famous examples of the Miss application and the misunderstanding of this notion of innate intelligence.  And it's how it exists and how it interacts with them.  With our environment.  And so i'm Fred will talk more about this, yes, not at all actually taking like the obvious if there's time hopefully.  we'll talk about a time I thought you're going to talk about a little bit is you know headphones yeah so i'm assuming that the way that we've designed us to change right like how people move forward from like where is a job or whatever any.  measure now yeah that's a great question um there are many different tells us test stuff the different ones, and they they do all have the same sort of.  approach as the same on Monday so see mom and they had all these different sub tests that measure different capacities and.  In very different areas, and so the actual IQ comes down to it's a combination of scores from all these different some tests and you know the.  The actual questions that they asked for the sub tests have changed, I mean I think in education and intelligence testing they've noticed, they would hopefully be sensitive to noticing that these.  Some of these questions are are more subjective and relative and others but, that being said, intelligence testing is still routinely employed.  In children.  for admission to schools.  Especially elite schools, I have a friend who works at a quaker school and it's a very wealthy affluent.  Famous paper school.  And they use intelligence testing to as part of the determination for picking who gets to go to the WHO is admitted listen.  I don't mean to unduly criticize her with her school is that this is done, whether we, the one of the fundamental problems we have is that the number of the amount of resources we have at our disposal everywhere is finite.  there's only a certain number of seats in the classroom so you have to somehow pick who gets one of those seats and intelligence testing is one of the many attributes tools at our disposal to help us with that.  And that is neither a criticism or endorsement, I actually have no I don't I don't know enough to have an opinion on whether that's right or wrong good or bad, but it's used.  But at least I mean it's a great question I think much of the subjectivity has been removed from these tests to get closer to whatever this sort of innate reasoning capability is.  But I can't imagine that will ever be perfect.  Right it's my opinion, but what are you measuring you're measuring something that's inherently unquantifiable and you're trying to just attach a number to it, so how do you do that there's lots of ways.  So, since i'm yeah to the bell curve this this debate rages on Murray, is still active this guy he the basic thesis of the bell curve.  Is that you know differences intelligence class structure and American life, the differences are genetic differences between races are innate and the data to support that.  and  Many have pointed out that there are significant flaws in his arguments, but it doesn't but the the the presence, the existence of this belief, this idea.  I mean it Murray isn't the one isn't responsible for the idea Murray is.  channeling the beliefs that pre existed, because of this long history that we just talked about.  was immediate reaction to the publication to if you would know to the bell curve from.  The second act that's why.  He became a writer and right.  But.  He doesn't go away publishable in 2020 same basically the same information and.  it's all that they're still subset of our populations of.  Well that's been that's why I persist right because the idea of predated this the publication of this Marie Marie is just another member of the.  consortium.  That just wants to believe this, regardless, and they and they will, as we as we've seen right like if you see a result it's.  It can be very difficult to remove your own biases to even be aware of your own biases and you're looking at a result there's another great book.  So the miss the I don't have this slide up here but um another great book and Miss measure of man.  by Stephen Jay gould he was an anthropologist and an archaeologist who wrote a director bottle to to intelligence testing and just like took down every every argument and just deconstructed it in a very systematic.  impartial way.  And he in that book, I read so many books, I remember to have that one or the garden gate or it might have been superior.  it's it's all it's all a mess up there now but, basically, there are many scientists statisticians who have done this sort of study over the past hundred hundred 50 years.  who came to these sorts of conclusions.  But later recanted because they they believe that at some point, some tests supported this hierarchy that they.  That they previously believed, but when they kept asking questions and they kept doing more tests, they just continually saw more and more that those interpretations just didn't stand up.  So it's more it's it's even more nuanced than that, just like many of these statisticians and scientists thought they were doing it right.  Based on the tests that they conducted.  And you know if you look at the data without awareness of the broader context, then you would be convinced to those conclusions right like black people have lower scores than white people.  If you'd know nothing else about the context, or if you don't seek out more information about the context, then you know it might be tempting to go along with devices that you already have.  This is one of the most challenging things that I found in reading about this history is that it's nuanced it's like these weren't villains.  Like there were some bill for sure, but not everyone was some of them really thought they were doing what they thought was right and eventually met some of them discovered that they weren't.  So that's kind of the state that we're in like we're doing things now we think it's right but we couldn't be Ross we do the best we can.  And and that's what we're doing.  Any more questions about this to the end of today's history lesson.  All right, let's take a five minute break and then, when we come back we'll talk about I will introduce the paper talks about some so I know probably wasn't easy and then we'll do discussion.

**no speaker (00:45:56.580):** you hear.

**Adam Labadorf (00:46:00.030):**  me.  yeah.  yeah and we might be.  willing.  To get excited.  yeah.  that's.

**no speaker (00:46:45.600):** me.

**Adam Labadorf (00:46:49.980):**  Do.  Our lesson is you.  know.  yeah.

**no speaker (00:47:18.210):** It is not only are they. really want.

**Adam Labadorf (00:47:30.660):**  yeah so we want.  Like.  You.  We.  have to be.  The same channel.  letting.  me.  know that he.  was about to sign.  In yeah yes, yes I don't.  know what.

**no speaker (00:49:22.380):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:49:24.240):**  I mean, I have to drink some water every morning.  Good.  Like.  Your enemies.  Did.  You.  want.  To leave, but we all.  know.  That right.  yeah.  it's nice to see.  You know not.  so far.  that's a designer of the year itself yeah and.

**no speaker (00:51:15.630):** again. fairly. And my dad my dad.

**Adam Labadorf (00:51:48.510):**  yeah yeah.  We.  yeah.  How many people.  never know about it raises questions, I want to ask how how many people some paper challenging but I mean I did anyone find it challenging like did anyone look at the supplementary materials it's 146 pages long.  And and some divided into sections seven sections, each of which was basically it's on paper right, it was a whole methodology as a whole analysis.  There was 100 and something different institutions involved in the affiliations, just the institutions, not that there's at least one person from each one of those institutions, but there was more than one from some of them, many of them.  This is just another example of.  How it's like this is, this is the scale, this is the amount of effort that is required to do this kind of study today or this the paper was quite short right like if you.  Just like looking at the scroll bar how far down the scroll bar on the page you get down like maybe 20% and then you don't paper right the rest of it is, is the affiliations and and other information and that's not even.  Not context.  And so any quick sidebar about that big science is sort of breaking our scientific attribution model like one of the most important things you do when you become a scientist is you read papers that has your last name at the front of the list.  Someone got their first name at the front of that list of hundreds of people how that happened not really clear.  um but you know I think probably the more responsible way of doing it was in the previous paper where it just had the consortium right this whole group of people, they deserve credit for this.  But.  So i'm not really sure how much background you all have in genomes and variance and mutation so I figured i'll just go through a couple concepts.  and make sure we understand we're all on the same page.  So generic variant is simply differences in.  Consistent differences found or differences done within numbers of within the genomes of members of the same species.  So we are all humans, we were all the same species and even more closely related than that, but we have variation differences in our premiums and those differences are what cause all the different phenotypic variability that you observed.  There are many different ways that genomes can bury and we're going to talk about how they vary in terms of.  orders of magnitude so on the small scale, we have.  Individual base level mutation so individual basis ratios are saying, like we tie changes, maybe two to three nucleotide changes in search installations, a little bit larger than that small in Dallas This ranges from between you know.  One to 100 base pairs there might be differences of that scale and those will be small and dells or.  Short tandem repeats how many of you have heard of shorthand repeats if anyone DNA forensics right you guys know all this, I don't know what's causing taking how many how many of you are really familiar with all the stuff on the side.  couple people well I you've seen this slide.  scalped some of my slides from my the class But OK, so a lot of people haven't so that's that's fine and.  As you increase in the order of magnitude so find scale structural variations structural variation means large parts of the DNA or are buried so either they're added or removed or they get moved around or the burden.  retro elements arrested transpose on these are repetitive elements that are have been added into the genome about 50 to 60% of our human genome is repetitive elements, including retro transpose ons.  And this is between 1010 thousand base pairs so that's the size and then, of course, you get the much larger scale mutations.  So, like whole chromosomes being lost or being duplicated or having having crossover so one part of one chromosome gets used to.  cross over with a different part of the different chromosome these large sort of variations are obviously very disruptive and the most on most commonly occur in cancer so cancer cells and have these very large.  rearrangements and mutation events.  But in you know normal, healthy humans, the most frequent type of phase change of mutation are on the left side of the scale, the relatively small, and in particular the most common type of mutation that we know about or single nucleotides when.  So these point mutations, there are three kinds of politicians accommodation is just one basis involved, you can either have an insertion were at the top, is the reference genome for a particular Lucas these Greens are just like they're sequences from an individual.  And some individual may have a see whether it's nothing the reference so they've had a base inserted, you may have a deletion, where there is a base in the reference and individual does not have that base.  And by far the most common is a substitution and so there's some base in the reference and it's a different face in individual.  Now, these are the three types when we're doing genome wide association studies as we'll see the vast majority of mutations we're looking at this time.  or this one based difference.  Now there's a little bit of terminology wishful from Canada.  The combination that runs.  I guess i'm just giving it away, but I was going to ask how many of you have heard of snips most most people probably.  And so what a snip is, it is a very.  it's the most commonly study pined but sniffs are different from just a variant in that they exist in the population with some non trivial frequency.  Each one of us has some number of mutations that is unique to us the private mutations and those are single nucleotide variance they only are become a snapper cali Marxism if they exist in some fraction of some population somewhere, that is the result of you know inheritance.  So that when we're talking about snips that's what we're talking about these are locations in the genome that are known to vary across different populations.  Most of the time they're based changes so they're not insertions deletions that can be but it's usually to a to a C or something of that nature and snips usually if there are are they indicate shared ancestry of some sort.  So just some a brief overview of linkage and and how what this concept is and why it's important.  and  As as accompli dollar familiar with, with the left side of this this is how.  The recombination in deployed organisms occurs where individual chromosomes are recombine in a random fashion and those recombined chromosomes.  That are passed on to to get me to their sperm or egg and this is the primary mechanism by which whole parts of genomes our share of are transmitted through offspring.  Now, because whole parts of hope are pieces of molecules are transferred at once genes that are close to each other.  or variants that are close to each other or, more likely to be transmitted together, then otherwise and so here on, and so the closer to genes are, the more likely they are to be codes or this spatially because of this property, there are other factors that influence this as well.  But this means that there's a non random frequency of o'neill's being passed out.  And so, this is the this non random relationship between a wheels that are nearby each other is called linkage so two for two variants are linked there under linkage, that means that they feel trapped and to travel have traveled together and history.  And genes that are further apart are less likely to be linked, simply because of this mechanism, so this is an important very important this linkage, and if two.  Things.  Do travel together our clubs are cold occur more than you expect with random totally random selection, they are called there said to be in linkage disequilibrium ld lincoln's disequilibrium just means that to variance travel together more often leads but that's basically what it means.  So what is the genome wide association study on a genome wide association study seeks to identify variance snips.  that are associated with some variable of interest, it can be a binary like a disease, whether whether you're studying the variants within a disease person or group of people that has a disease versus people who don't.  Or what the continuous change by type which variance are more common in people who are taller versus shorter.  Another another piece of information, you might be interested in is you know the assessment is is the frequency Basically, this is how this is what we're estimating.  Is a variant is the frequency of a variance higher or lower in one group versus another and that's basically what what we're talking about.  So an important like the primary output of a genome wide association study are these so tickled to us summary statistics and not going to get into the depth details of how these are computed statistically, but this is what is published when did you study this is published.  Every genomic variant that is analyzed and there's a specific.  only some of the variance in the genome by the usually are considered there are.  Billions of snips variants and snips that have been observed in the human genome, but not all of them occur.  At over a particular frequency, nor can we measure billions of things at once with this technology in hundreds of thousands of people, so what we do instead is we filter the variants that we know about and just look for those specific variants.  Each one of those variants will have statistics like this it will have a position So where is it in the genome.  What is the the p value so like how surprising is is that finding is the effect size, the effect size is how large of an effect, how much is the association.  of having won the wheel with your your your outcome of interest, so, for instance in alzheimers disease.  There are certain variants that increase your risk of developing alzheimers disease April we is a gene that has different archetypes that has increases or decreases your risk of developing alzheimer's disease in your lifetime.  The amount that having a particular variant increases your risk is the effect size.  And it's actually very small, there are variants for parkinson's alzheimer's I study nerves federation's those the top of my head.  But it may increase your risk for like a couple percent maybe so you your your odds of getting parkinson's if you have certain snips are increased slightly if you have certain variance.  So that's for binary outcome, whether you're going to get parkinson's or not.  Otherwise it's the rate of change for continuous outcomes so like height, if you have this illegal how much taller RU than people who don't have that will do.  What is also reported is the reference illegal, so this is what's in the genome, this is what the most common very into that position.  and also the alternate or the risk polio, are you talking about disease to risk, what is the variants that increases your risk of some disease or just what is the alternate that is less common than the reference.  These summary statistics are used in our in the study that authors used some resistance from published, do you asked or other things.  and use it for for part of their analysis and i'll talk about that, when we get to it.  Any questions so far.  So, the last thing I think it's, the last thing, yes, the last thing background that I want to talk about so when you're doing a genome wide association study.  You have some population of people some number of people in this study, they had 293,000 or so.  And those those people, each one of them.  Was measured for 1.9 point 3 million steps so each person had 9.3 million measurements.  Roughly.  there's a caveat to that, but every every every individual had 9.3 million.  measurements.  And the G loss asks for each one of them.  Is the the little frequency associated with some phenotype in our case, this phenotype was the number of years of educational attainment to continue which vendor.  And so they did 9.3 million tests.  And this, this is how do you ask works every was has done this, this number of tests.  Now, also in the paper they computed what's called apologetic risk index so apologetic risk index simply means instead of looking for.  The effect of a single snap on a phenotype you're looking at all of the snips collectively like if if.  Every one of these individual snips has an effect size like an effect on the phenotype number of years, if you were to combine the effects of all those together how much of the overall phenotype can you explain.  So these are the two really fundamental concepts, this is basically what do you watch is probably any standard G watch you'll read will take this Farm Bill they'll report what the individual snips association with the phenotype of interest is.  And then we'll also compute some sort of poly genetic risk score Polygon explore.  And that's the basis of G was any questions about that.  So, before I go into the results does anyone have any burning questions about the paper or go over them.  It will see see how well do.  So this is your one I mean it's just I can't help us shake my head i'm not not accusing anyone have anything but.  This is so typical of these sorts of studies, there were three figures in this paper.  Maybe 10 paragraphs.  And a supplement with 146 pages like longer it's such there's so much work, I went into this for such a small output.  But anyway, this is bigger number one of three.  reasons I like a cell paper or they have eight figures, all of which have 10s of panels, that the opposite extreme.  But anyway, so this is figure one, this is a so called Manhattan plot, and the reason why they call it a Manhattan flight is it looks kind of like a stylized and each one of these sort of like a building.  Like all of that.  And along the X axis are the positions, a linear positions along each of the chromosomes so on the left is crumbs on one from them to the left to the right to left started the chromosome the right to gather the chromosome the height of each of these bars each.is a variance.  Right, rather than 9.3 million variance, and so this is what 9.3 million dots looks like.  And under the height of the bar is associated with the the p value that we talked about this is the precision of the effect it's not the size of the fact that just how precise it was.  And so what you'll notice is that for each one of these, it looks like a Manhattan beach building because there whenever it let's just look at this most extreme example.  there's one variant that has the most as the smallest P value but there's lots of other variants nearby that also have salty guns.  Right, so this, these are those locations that are in so called linkage disequilibrium by all of these bands this even though it looks like a single the single bar does actually like it's a span of the genome, for all of these different variance occur.  And so, each one of these, the X is the so called lead snippets the one variant that's in that particular region that was had was the most popularly associated.  So, even though there were many hundreds of thousands of areas that were associated with educational years of educational attainment they picked one within each sort of ld block.  To be representative of that bowl.  When I didn't mention before is that so that each snip if it's a snip That means that it exists in some frequency in the population and there's a.  There is a an identifier system associated with snaps were.  There they were given these artists numbers there's an RS number number number, this is just a known snip that's been quantified somewhere that's been validated has been given identifier, and so that's what these are is things are.  There known snips and what you notice is that most of these snips are already known like they don't have a name.  Perhaps they do now.  But it didn't at the time.  variance may not have been annotated or studied in any sort of detail off to the point of this population of this study.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:11:55.770):**  Adam.

**no speaker (01:11:56.700):** yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:11:58.140):**  So those three are marked because they're from the study that predates this right the 2013 study.

**Adam Labadorf (01:12:05.550):**  I just saw a legend was I was looking at the screen.  So they may, let me, let me be I could be wrong with that will be wrong with that Am I wrong but that also.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:12:17.250):**  Well, I mean.

**Adam Labadorf (01:12:17.910):**  I have the heart and people.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:12:19.170):**  out and these three snips are the three that were identified from the cornelius at all paper that was of 100 and like something like 100,000 individuals and science.  So I don't know if it's just supposed to be there is like a sanity check that their analysis pulled out what the earlier analysis done did Plus, like all these.  Other 74.

**Adam Labadorf (01:12:45.060):**  Stephen sorry let's rewind about five minutes every single one of these snips has an RS ID number because that's by definition sorry I totally blanked on them.  So they get for free wheeling now every one of these snips is announcement, because we only mother knows next sorry erase that you're totally right, thank you for pointing that i'm Melissa.  whoops right.  They raised from the one of these snips is an awesome job.  Forget it.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:13:13.680):**  But I just noticed it because I read that part of part of this book yesterday, and she refers to these to these numbers as being like a staci numbering system.

**Adam Labadorf (01:13:23.460):**  i'm so glad you read that book, because otherwise I would have been totally wrong and everyone thought I was writing.  i'm gonna try to backpedal a little bit, though, to say that there are more variants there are variants that we don't know about, because all the variants that we do know, have only been measured in the people that we've studied and we haven't studied everyone.  So although each one of these has an iris number, there are variants that exists that we haven't played yet so.  All right, so that's figure one.  And just know that there are 74 of these buildings.  And there's one snip that they've sort of picked out for each for each one of them this all leads that.  Alright, so figure to this is where the summary statistics come in.  They.  collected the summary statistics from previously published.  Studies.  For snips that are associated with these different outcomes, so they didn't run this analysis they actually went into the literature and they downloaded.  The summary statistics from these previous studies that were looking for association with these items.  And so they had there's one I studied other for association with brain buying the potty potty break the volume of these different brain regions, and then the overall interpreting of violence that, just like the whole volume of the skull.  They looked they've done they compared with alzheimer's bipolar or psychiatric behavioral and anthropometric so body mass index and height and what this plot is showing.  Is that the regions of the genome, the variance that were detected in the years of years of education study.  were very highly correlated with the variants associated with these particular measures right, so this is just saying that the same variance that are associated with edge use of educational attainment were also associated with.  intracranial on.  The the.  Remember the effect size, so the effect size is whether you're The rest is increased or decreased that's how they get positive or negative correlation.  So, in other words, these same regions, the same various words were associated with educational years and intracranial volume and they were.  Both increased right, so the direction of effect because the same for all times to these.  Some of the same various for were found to be associated between educational use of attainment and alzheimer's but the effect was reversed.  So the it's the opposite so it's like if you're if you're not prone to all timers disease, then you'll have those variants are have higher association with years of educational pain.  cognitive performance was really highly correlated neuroticism was very lowly correlated I thought it was somewhat interesting that the the variants that are associated with years of education are positively associated with having bipolar disorder.  And schizophrenia.  So at what point does your smarts become a mental illness not sure, but they tend to call her the number of years of art or maybe the people who have more education tends to have these diseases right so that's a really important point we'll get to any conclusions.  So this just to summarize this all is the same, that the same parts of the genome variance that are associated with educational years of attainment.  Very in correlation with these other variables and none of them have anything to do with the relative size of the different parts of the brain.  So the discipline to wrap up the findings and then we'll go on to discussion.  There were 74 independent close I.  Each one of which had many variants that were associated but they pick wonder, and each.  That were associated with years of education.  The variants and these low side are also associated with these other phenotypes as we've described.  And I didn't cover the figure three just to save time, but the genes in the low side, but they found were associated with nerve development and central nervous system related stuff and somewhat exclusively those.  And then, finally, you know the mean predictive power of apologetics for right, so this is they took all the snips that every person had the score the score and they correlated that with.  The educational use of attainment the effect size overall it's just 3.2%.  So this is actually I mean yeah sure they found 74 low side that are associated with educational years of attainment.  But from the the lowest score to the highest score that only increases your predictive accuracy by like 3% so it's really not that big but it's a very small that size but it's significant.  And so that's so that's the main point, and lastly, they have two paragraphs about this about the interpretation is that these these genes cannot be interpreted as causing the use of educational attainment.  They they look for this, they tested for this to see you know, there are many phenotypic correlations are correlations between these various related phenotypes.  That make it impossible to pin down precisely what the genetic contributions, and so this is like the least probably one of the least conservative estimates and maybe less than this, but they really tried to emphasize that this is not.  Not to be interpreted this puzzle, if you have this gene it doesn't mean you're going to have X number of more years of educational attainment which does not mean you're X numbers smarter people, that is not how we interpret these results.  Many will interpret them that way, the followers of Murray, probably do, but the.  best we can do is present, the information.  And that's truthful away as possible and guide people and how to and how to not interrupt.  So that's that's all that I had any last questions about the paper before we do discussion.  All right, then please self organize into your groups.  20 minutes.  Computer I have to figure out have a quarter the completed with jack.  jack so that.  We can go over the answer.  Those so.  That last 20 minutes yeah so like one.  i'll wait till you get back up to 20 minutes.  yeah let me I forget how to have us.  Help how do I give him a gym or.  Easy easy peasy.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:21:51.150):**  So i'm in.

**Adam Labadorf (01:21:54.600):**  My doing it right, you can just tell me.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:21:57.030):**  You just go to the announcements.  And then you need to make the jam board to.

**Adam Labadorf (01:22:05.190):**  In Google today all right, you did this last time.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:22:08.670):**  yeah do you want to do it this time.

**Adam Labadorf (01:22:10.680):**  Right, yes, I need to watch them on TV.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:22:14.430):**  Alright, so you have to go go to the ether agi.  And then the Semester and then activities.  jam board and then you copy the template.  And rename it.

**Adam Labadorf (01:22:51.060):**  Everyone in the class gets to see behind the curtain.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:22:53.520):**  yeah exactly.  No wizardry here.

**Adam Labadorf (01:23:08.070):**  link.  link.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:23:09.630):**  you're right yep up at the top, you just hit share and it'll let you copy the link and actually you can change the top of it once you get it shared because it still says devonport.  I forgot to change that.  The template actually i'll modify the template so it doesn't say.

**no speaker (01:23:43.980):** house. yeah. You. lose anything. Right we're. All waiting on. As.

**Adam Labadorf (01:24:48.720):**  Long as there's.

**no speaker (01:24:52.380):** No. Just. That.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:25:17.820):**  and actually Adam.  Can I in peruse all.  One thing i'd like to use a lot with the announcements is the painting link.  So, like I I changed it so that.  The jam board links pinned to the top of the announcements now.

**Adam Labadorf (01:25:35.340):**  I was having to tell them.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:25:37.620):**  it's like so so if there's something really important like case studies.  yeah I.

**Adam Labadorf (01:25:43.170):**  pin the drop bombs, but.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:25:44.520):**  Then it's we're done with case study one so, then you can unpack it and then make make more sense of what evers at the top So things are easier to find.

**no speaker (01:25:54.810):** cool.

**Adam Labadorf (01:25:56.460):**  sounds like slack.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:25:57.630):**  kind of.

**no speaker (01:25:58.920):** know.

**Adam Labadorf (01:26:01.650):**  Because yeah.  You can always use another communication medium.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:26:09.900):**  Well, sometimes I wish we had slack for this fast, but it would be too much with the perusal.

**Adam Labadorf (01:26:14.880):**  See i'm talking to the room I gotta change.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:26:17.670):**  Oh i'm sorry guys.  yeah no it's okay.  I didn't have too much else to add.

**Adam Labadorf (01:26:34.410):**  No.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:26:36.180):**  yeah.  i'm sorry I keep.  I keep coming in and out of disappearing, first the doctor called me and.  groceries got delivered and then I think i'm good now, but the doctor still supposed to call me back so.

**Adam Labadorf (01:26:54.510):**  call you back view well yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:26:58.140):**  yeah.  it's complicated because she had to run off to an emergency deliberate.

**Adam Labadorf (01:27:16.080):**  Respect for clinicians before, but the ones who are still at it now, I can see.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:27:24.540):**  You know.  Maybe totally.  Totally are and it's it's very strikes me as funny because people are still so mean to that, I mean i'll be i'll be in there and people come in and like are pissed off that they're waiting or.  or or just rude and i'm like what is wrong with.

**Adam Labadorf (01:27:50.400):**  You.  Oh well, let me.  Suffering suffering.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:27:59.400):**  yeah.  But that was section everything's great.

**no speaker (01:28:07.380):** Thanks.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:28:18.690):**  I didn't get a chance to look at this paper as much as I would have wanted to.  I I have been reading the heart and book which summarizes this paper so.

**Adam Labadorf (01:28:32.130):**  Now jack lottery is good.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:28:34.380):**  it's very good.  it's super good I took it with me to the waiting room yesterday.  Like put a dent in a couple of chapters very proud of myself.

**Adam Labadorf (01:28:47.730):**  So.  Educational.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:28:52.770):**  she's really good at explaining a lot of things.

**Adam Labadorf (01:28:56.790):**  Right.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:28:57.390):**  i'd say that's one of the real strengths.

**Adam Labadorf (01:29:02.040):**  yeah she was able to distill down, something that is really both emotionally charged.  to misinterpretation and so.  He wants to.  yeah there's a really good job happy.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:29:19.230):**  it's like i'm ever impressed by the citations in it like.  The level of depth the chief maintains with like citing.  Citing preferences and like.  One thing I was thinking about actually is like maybe in future iterations like you this this paper, the off I don't know how you say okay all right.  it's like sandwiched in between.  two.  Other papers and really kind of the can really be used to show how.  He wants to so reliant on the number of.  Individuals you're looking at in order to find the facts right because the first paper that was on this topic was only like 100,000 people this one's a bit more, and that the one that followed it was like.  A million people right.  is the one that Fred mentioned.  is having faq.

**Adam Labadorf (01:30:19.440):**  And so, like that.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:30:20.550):**  That whole thing could make a.  Like almost like one coherent story.  Of the evolution of G was.  yeah and like.  The basics of what makes a good.  versus bad.  Study i'm thinking of using it for 751.

**Adam Labadorf (01:30:42.270):**  Point 1,000,001.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:30:44.370):**  Just like kinda like the story of how there's three papers and they all build upon the knowledge.

**Adam Labadorf (01:30:51.660):**  And what the limitations.

**no speaker (01:30:53.250):** and

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:30:54.870):**  abilities of each are it's sort of the complexity of the overall conclusions.  You know.  it's just kind of like a good perspective.  So, but I don't know, do you cover that in your class because I don't want to.  cover it if if you already cover it.

**Adam Labadorf (01:31:12.300):**  Tom know.  No, not even close.  I mean i'm actually starting to get.  A little dissatisfied with my five to eight class and my both my classes actually.  The problem that i'm always having to contend with here is that there's just so much.  So many facts so much knowledge.  And yes, just like a no fire hose.  And I think.  Neither of my courses are very intellectually challenging.  Like it's just not intellectual stuff but the projects are harder but it's not in terms of the lecture content it's just like you would a very.  High Frequency to do it is here's where the chips experiment is here's you know.  here's what.  i'm.  going to teach because there's lots of details that are really important and knowing how to wield those tools appropriate.  And like.  It will be like it's as much as I would like to figure out how to align really like an intellectual intellectual exercise with just the dumping of all those facts that they just need to know.  If i'm sorry dissatisfied with material I have those that.  again.  Like your classes all about thinking and critical thinking and reasoning about numbers and Viola, yes, my classes and projects and my question, good evening.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:33:03.900):**  Well, maybe you can think a little bit more about how you could possibly integrate the two things because, like.  How could you.  You make it for about the.  last thing of the facts than the actual facts themselves.  Because like in the in the end, right all these things we teach people not gonna remember that they're going to Google.  In the in the end.  Right.

**Adam Labadorf (01:33:37.980):**  facts.

**no speaker (01:33:39.030):** yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:33:40.590):**  Right, no one people don't remember the definitions of things, for I mean if they work with them every day they do, but if they don't work with them every day it's going to be something that they you know, like kind of go to Google to Google for or whatever external brain they're using.

**Adam Labadorf (01:33:59.040):**  yeah I mean for many things.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:34:03.810):**  So I think in some respects, from what you're talking about you know, maybe it's more about.  teaching people the logical approach to use when they are when they encounter a new technique that they haven't read that's beyond your class.

**Adam Labadorf (01:34:23.430):**  You know.  That is what I hope to impart comment.  yeah so like.  Knowing how to ask the right question.  questions to ask.  And you need a certain amount of knowledge is baseline to know how to ask the question of.  Like if you type into Google, how do I do RNA sequencing analysis like you'll get stuff back.  But there's a ton of stuff.  And so.  that's why muscle.  memory lectures, I found myself getting kind of bored in my lectures, I think.  That in class suggests that the students, maybe as well.  Interesting so we'll see I don't know, maybe, maybe not I mean.  Depending on your interesting level, you find the lecture interesting that it means like way over everybody sense.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:35:52.050):**  I mean, so I had this one guy that taught.  By a physical biochemistry or something, and he just would like read off of his lecture notes, every time and he was obviously board.  And then comes through.  i'm not saying you're there.

**Adam Labadorf (01:36:12.780):**  For some of my lectures, I am but i'm honest about it i'm like look I don't find this interesting but it's stuff you need to know what.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:36:27.990):**  yeah I was actually i'm i'm surreptitiously looking at the jam board.  To see.

**Adam Labadorf (01:36:36.480):**  i'm putting you on the room speakers again.

**no speaker (01:36:39.090):** Okay.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:36:41.310):**  So this octopus drawing is still on the board.  Or have you just kept the name.  Because it was there, the first week or two weeks.

**Adam Labadorf (01:36:56.610):**  yeah.

