---
---

# Discussion

**Date:** 3/29/2022

**no speaker (00:00:05.730):** HIV, with a.

**Adam Labadorf (00:00:08.309):**  vision.  So they are.  heading.

**no speaker (00:00:22.950):** i'm sure. You have.

**Adam Labadorf (00:00:31.200):**  been saying for a long time she.  will be famous but racism.  So.  that's been a.  Long.  haul.  Seeing.  A new sensation blessings reality, a lot of guys, but then that you, they are making that.  Motion it table so here is our.

**Melisa Osborne (00:01:15.930):**  Yes.  I can hear you.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:20.130):**  know.  yeah.  You may now be addressing the class.

**Melisa Osborne (00:01:32.970):**  Oh okay yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:37.350):**  i'll use the power of technology to get people's attention and your voice as well.

**Melisa Osborne (00:01:41.430):**  Okay sounds good.  Everybody.

**Adam Labadorf (00:01:48.480):**  Thank this is.  Well i'm Melissa may not be joining us on zoom for a little while.  yeah this.  So.  excited happy right.

**no speaker (00:02:07.380):** Exactly.

**Adam Labadorf (00:02:10.350):**  To mix marvel.  Because while seeing them.  inside out man.  I say that does that so now we're probably over knows what I mean when I say I mixed marble marble like that's what I mean it seems like such an appropriate like expression.  A metaphor of a mixed emotion, but I thought i'd say that and people are like What do you mean a mix marble and like inside out and then they go okay got it all right sure so anyway, I miss marvel.  Alright, so today we are discussing versus going away.  and  The readings about weathering and other mental health issues hide from the controls.  And so, before we start, though.  I wanted to so afraid to send this around.  How many of you watch the i'm still trying to remember the acronym K bj bj hearings.  I haven't committed her name's remember yet cuz Han JI brown jack's like so fingers crossed the right thing will happen here.  But she had this really I thought funds and Fred thought inspiring comments at the end or at some point in the hearing and so i'm going to take a cue from fred's playbook i'm just going to play this.  For inspiration for today sort of the first mini dedication.

**no speaker (00:03:59.430):** Equal. power.

**Adam Labadorf (00:06:42.060):**  amazing right.  I don't know, maybe the world has always been this way, but like there are these moments of shining light like that that we hear about and then also these moments of extreme darkness like we can see all of it now, for better or for worse.

**Melisa Osborne (00:07:14.370):**  I don't know.  For me, it makes me think it's always worthwhile to say that word of encouragement, because you just never know like you know that stuck with her how long.  And it was just the smallest kindness right.

**no speaker (00:07:36.150):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:07:38.730):**  that's all I had about that.  Okay, so.  Last time bread talked about.  Well, actually will do that the the plan dedication for today so today's lecture is dedicated to Dr Lisa Fernandez, she is an A generalist intern which just means a.  doctor, I think.  That the Zuckerberg San Francisco general hospital she is the dean of population health and health equity for the ucsf school of medicine.  she's the associate dean of population health and such on started talking twice.  To the founding director of the ucsf letter next Center of excellence, which is an organization, supported by ucsf and are you a US government group I don't remember which group to increase diversity in academia that's purpose.  And she is very much interested in some of the barriers to delivering effective care to diverse communities.  And so what I am, this is a quote from from her interview but i'm actually just going to go over and it's from an npr interview i'm just going to play the little bit of the interview.  That is.  This is the way to do it.  yeah.  So just as a kind of a follow on to that I, my appointment is in the department of neurology at the Bu school school medicine and the MC.  And dmc is a.  So called safety net hospital and it's pipefish population is very different than, say mass general or some of the other hospitals around and that they serve underserved populations which are in this in this city and many.  predominantly people of color.  And they have you know, there are many different languages that patients speak I mean there's probably a dozen or more, most of them are English, many of them are Spanish.  Spanish but there's lots of others as well from all over the world and that language barrier is very significant, I mean, how do you overcome a language barrier to get people to show up for their appointments well, you need to have interpreters.  and interpreters for all these different languages are very difficult to come by, it is a practical concern that the hospital like there's just there are never enough interpreters, even for.  For the more common languages.  And so I mean it sounds simple when you say it, but like someone who speaks your language and understands your own cultural cues is really important to delivering healthcare and clearly now there's all sorts of issues that are related to that and that intersects with with these.  With these issues and the socio cultural aspects as well, and so that was so one of the many challenges that we that we face.  So dedication.  Okay, so today we're going to be again I split up the discussion of the readings into two sections so we're going to do the first half of class for the discussion on the readings and then the second half, on the annotations the pima in the Indian discussion.  And so, for the first discussion I populated the that document that we have online with some questions about the mental health one, so this is Williams, it was a very long article I found.  And pretty dense because these review articles typically are.  And it it brought up a lot of different.  factors that are involved in and the intersection between socio economic status mental health and other issues, and so one of the questions that I asked in there is.  This this slide is kind of like a queue for one of the questions that i'm asking you to talk to discuss.  So if you with that if you could say I think it's page 39.  yeah So if you could please break up into your groups and.  discuss will shoot for about 20 minutes.

**no speaker (00:14:05.160):** Oh yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (00:14:17.700):**  Oh i'm doing okay.  yeah yeah Am I am I still on room speaker or.  No i'm i'm doing i'm doing all right lots of planning.  So Ian Ian goes to his grandparents tomorrow and so it's like i'm packing his little suitcase.  Like.  They moved my my thing up till earlier, the day with 830.

**Adam Labadorf (00:14:51.060):**  Oh.  Well, maybe not for them.

**Melisa Osborne (00:14:56.490):**  it's first thing I have to be there by 630.

**Adam Labadorf (00:14:59.970):**  All true come on cheese.

**Melisa Osborne (00:15:02.700):**  So it's gonna be a long day actually if you think about it.  I they told me like a whole itinerary and stuff so I probably won't be like.  The hospital time is so weird it's very slow everything takes a lot slower to do that, you would think.  yeah so.

**Adam Labadorf (00:15:24.630):**  we're getting an early is a good sign that means that there's less chance that things will be behind by the time i'm sure.

**Melisa Osborne (00:15:31.230):**  that's true, but you know I always remember that my first time I probably bought someone.  Oh yeah cuz I was an emergency.  So actually come to think about it, maybe they were just trying to get me done before the next one.  anyway.

**Adam Labadorf (00:16:02.670):**  Slowly marble.

**no speaker (00:16:04.260):** yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (00:16:06.450):**  I don't know what's going on it at Bu yes yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:16:14.310):**  It looks.

**Melisa Osborne (00:16:22.440):**  it's freezing.  And yet all my flowers are up.

**Adam Labadorf (00:16:32.700):**  Open an accident.

**Melisa Osborne (00:16:34.350):**  they're not blue but yeah i'm sure they're regretting that decision.  So.

**Adam Labadorf (00:16:42.420):**  Take a look at the questions that I.  wrote for this this one.

**Melisa Osborne (00:16:49.320):**  Yes, I did.  i'm looking at them right now.  Oh wow I like that feedback loops thing.

**Adam Labadorf (00:17:16.050):**  Really, inspired by my thinking about how much is next time.

**Melisa Osborne (00:17:25.980):**  I love it planting the seed, very important.

**Adam Labadorf (00:17:31.710):**  I mean if I was to say that there's No one.  At all this is that the reason why some systemic racism exists is because the feedback loops.

**Melisa Osborne (00:17:47.400):**  Yes, actually that's a wonder that's a really good point.

**Adam Labadorf (00:17:53.220):**  Self self reinforcing that sounds.

**Melisa Osborne (00:17:58.830):**  Very.  kind of like Congress.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:07.170):**  Like.

**Felicity Crawford (00:18:07.860):**  A Melissa could you put.  That link from Adam in the.

**Melisa Osborne (00:18:10.410):**  House tonight I am working on.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:19.080):**  You know.

**Melisa Osborne (00:18:22.230):**  There, there you go first today.  it's page 39.  yeah of course i'm sorry I was so slow, I saw it right away, it just.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:37.410):**  Oh.  well.  yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (00:18:44.850):**  yeah so have you have you done much thinking about the algorithmic unit, yet, are you.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:53.610):**  you'll get there, I prepared the.  slides.

**Melisa Osborne (00:18:58.920):**  Okay, did you change much from last semester.

**no speaker (00:19:02.280):** Nothing.

**Melisa Osborne (00:19:03.960):**  awesome.  Keep it simple man keep it simple.

**Adam Labadorf (00:19:08.790):**  Exactly I haven't gone through it, I mean, I think that is often what.  I thought about it but.  I haven't gone through the slides in detail.  But I don't know I think I conveyed what I wanted to convey last semester so.

**Melisa Osborne (00:19:27.270):**  No, I agree.  I agree it's enough just to have to try to fit it in a different format, you know.  that's challenging enough as it is.  And how to redesign the discussion next will not read this time but.  You know the discussion itself is very different, because of the format.

**Adam Labadorf (00:19:53.010):**  One reading one or two.

**Melisa Osborne (00:19:55.230):**  yeah it's not too many.  I don't know, maybe we can talk about it later in the summer is there might there's a lot of resources out there on on this, perhaps we can find a a general resource.  That is much better fitted.

**Adam Labadorf (00:20:17.070):**  You know, like maybe we can maybe we can find a chapter in one of the many.  algorithm books.

**Melisa Osborne (00:20:23.370):**  or something.  That we can.  add the PDF.  In for next.  year or something.

**Adam Labadorf (00:20:32.520):**  yeah the weapons of mass destruction, for instance, that would be a good i'm sure there's a chapter in there.

**Melisa Osborne (00:20:39.660):**  yeah, I think, maybe the way to go, would be to check with the library as to which books, they can get us access to because, like it's actually really sucks that they haven't been able to get us access to superior but it's great that we're able to access any chapter medical apartheid so.  You know so maybe we can check about ethical algorithms and.  That mass destruction and see if they're able to get.  Those in PDF form, and then we can pick from there what's the best chapter would be.

**Adam Labadorf (00:21:26.370):**  I think we could definitely enrich the readings for these topics I don't even remember what's next time it's what's what's data healthcare.  Border regions are.

**Melisa Osborne (00:21:37.140):**  let's let me go to the library a.  course library here and let's see i'll put this in the chat to see if you wanted to check over your stuff and see if you what you think.  he's asking me about her unit.  So yeah so like.  yeah so we basically just have the two articles from box and from pro publica for next week and then more case studies and that nephrology article.  Which.

**Adam Labadorf (00:22:28.560):**  is like.  Last semester that nephrology article was a really important article.  Until.

**Melisa Osborne (00:22:36.360):**  I think it was very impactful.  Okay, and then medical apartheid is for Chapter I should get the link in here because we do have it now.  The Bu library.

**no speaker (00:23:03.180):** yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (00:23:09.150):**  Oh yeah it's the bias articles really good.

**Adam Labadorf (00:23:14.640):**  For the next week.  yeah.  yeah.  Good time there's a lot of discussion going on.

**Melisa Osborne (00:23:29.430):**  That is.  How do I add the readings again.

**Adam Labadorf (00:23:44.940):**  yeah.  It doesn't.  require everything yeah be ready yeah.  On each.  Other that can be friend.  who had.  A baby and maybe i'm kind of a social movement so.  yeah even.  Without your part Virginia.  city if they stop you want to have added to the site just let me know.

**Felicity Crawford (00:24:26.970):**  Okay it's just a great to be geez i'm going to miss Melissa.  wouldn't know my head my feet.

**Adam Labadorf (00:24:40.980):**  yeah well.

**Melisa Osborne (00:24:42.900):**  it's really funny I was drafting my out of office message.  And there's like if you need this contact this person, and if you do this contact this person, and if you need these 50 things contact this person this person that was like wow I cover a lot of ground.  I don't usually think about this too much.

**Adam Labadorf (00:25:07.080):**  You almost need a secretary someone to contact you they can route things.

**Melisa Osborne (00:25:12.510):**  Well it's funny because Burke at once told me if I ever needed to Secretary she likes to reconsider first.

**Adam Labadorf (00:25:21.510):**  I mean I I can think of, you know more effective person, then, and then burka, and her her whole demeanor and approach.

**Melisa Osborne (00:25:30.000):**  I agree, I agree.

**Adam Labadorf (00:25:31.500):**  You could sit down and you know.

**Melisa Osborne (00:25:33.930):**  She does I I always think when we start our when we start our super special department she's gonna be by i'm going to be, you know have whatever role, I have a.  Bird is gonna be my.  My health.

**Adam Labadorf (00:25:51.150):**  Maybe.

**Melisa Osborne (00:25:52.170):**  For Coco how are we can we can like shared newbies that's more if there.

**Adam Labadorf (00:25:57.810):**  are multiple people.  And it's long oh.  How are you guys feeling we wrap up on the mental health one.  Are you still working you one more time.  we reconvene.  alright.  So.  i'm thinking of doing something kind of experimental here.

**no speaker (00:26:48.060):** let's draw some arrows.

**Adam Labadorf (00:26:56.610):**  So my idea is that you know it's like one of these factors phenomena interacts with another in a directed fashion, perhaps with so arrows.  So I want to suggest.

**no speaker (00:27:10.890):** meditation.

**Melisa Osborne (00:27:17.460):**  Definitely.

**Adam Labadorf (00:27:18.510):**  And how the how the interaction.  couple of things, based on if you're like lower income live in a lower area or schools or less funded have a feeling it's not as great as the patient or, on the other, scale and maybe you can afford private school education.  For sure.  full access and quality of education.  masa Can you see the arrows and i'm drawing.

**Melisa Osborne (00:27:46.050):**  yeah actually see you know what can you hear me.

**Adam Labadorf (00:27:49.080):**  Yes, okay.

**Melisa Osborne (00:27:50.790):**  Okay, good i'm gonna make a new page in this notebook and.  i'm going to put your picture and then i'm going to draw arrows.

**Adam Labadorf (00:28:04.530):**  What are you doing.

**Melisa Osborne (00:28:05.820):**  The group notebook.

**Adam Labadorf (00:28:08.850):**  Okay.

**Melisa Osborne (00:28:11.220):**  yeah see look.

**no speaker (00:28:13.680):** If anyone's watching.

**Adam Labadorf (00:28:16.410):**  I can't see what you're doing, but the response from the audience is great so keep doing what you're doing.

**Melisa Osborne (00:28:21.810):**  yeah i'll just i'll just mirror everything here.

**Adam Labadorf (00:28:31.560):**  All right, I mean I could like like I could I have my screens are mirrored so I could like switch this, but then I can draw on it.  Alright, so this arrow is drawn in that direction, because it going the other direction.

**no speaker (00:28:47.010):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:28:49.350):**  So how am I.  Generally, access to higher education, the higher paying jobs and where you are resources so things like a feedback loop as well.  So I just want to suggest another era.  Oh so many words i'll start from the back of posting to say on socioeconomic status again physical health on.  having access to higher socioeconomic status gives you access to more resources in terms of your health know some more money and i'm noticed, like all the classes.  A lot better healthier and more expensive oh yeah hasn't been.  more expensive, even if you can access it right there are these food deserts in cities where you just there aren't supermarkets, for whatever reason yeah oh.  And does it go another direction.  Oh.  Look they're not very physically healthy self concepts in the very near to you and just get very much lemon.  So look another feedback.  But that was a mental health to social scientists because.  When you're going from memory stresses on generally through DNA and traveling.  On.  anyone's.  toes I.  I jumped ahead you're in that way yeah.  But no, and it's just.  So they had to read the first one.  yeah completely they talked about that in.  The article as well right how.  You people have lower socio economic status have higher rates of all sorts of mental health disorders.  But does it go in the other direction.  How my mental health issues and fluency socio economic status or lack of as well, well, I guess, as you can see, like a lot of our population.  There is the lack of truth and from there on changing jobs or a lifestyle that.  exists, yes.  yeah.  So mental health some MIT like Mike preserve socio economic status.  Oh definitely got sprayed in that case does.  And I don't know the answer to this, but like.  I imagine, I think they didn't they talk about something not exactly with mental health, but like there were a number one of the paragraphs they talked about like an average number of mental health days.  That people needed to take right, so there is actually some amount of disability associated with mental health issues, and so, in that, in that sense, perhaps it does, in fact, you know form another feedback would.  Anyone another another era.  Any mental health effects in trouble.  Because a lot of.  Issues mental health manifest actually a physical health.  issues are.  Like big cause.  adverse effects, and it will have.  So if you have limited access to both diagnosis and treatment of that also more likely to have worked.  No.  No My next question is going to be.  anything about that.  How does our physical health how about our physical health and mental health, and how does that interact with US economic status.  anything about me and it'll disease and ability to a medical bills that you know serious issue in this country that not only is it.  Okay, to you and your family faulty entertainment on absolutely and I hadn't even thought about that, if that hadn't occurred to me that, of course, you're right like fear of you know accumulating medical bills.  That you can.  Like the huge stress huge source of stress, because I mean it's these are these awful stories that people just are become bankrupt because someone gets it like.  their family and their financial future may be entirely ruined because they just can't pay for the large and often arbitrary costs associated with different procedures just.  Random random chance oh yeah I mean.  Because that's that's like interacts with the healthcare system right so it's not just like you, are sick.  Like physically sick you probably aren't very mentally well as well, while you're physically say that has an impact, but then, how do you deal with the physical sickness also has enough that's enough.  And we can add more circles here to.  Anyone thought of it but yeah well anything like discrimination impact on mental health but they're actually like this paper sort of outlines, but also, indirectly, like you said, like.  interacting with the healthcare system, you know or or lack of interaction, because you are afraid that embark on interest you are like a fair and like well, no.  I mean, I guess, mostly go back to this region you're talking about homeless populations who are generally like you know mentally you know exactly mental health issues right and and really discriminate against them until they're created those themselves yeah.  yeah.  I mean could argue that discrimination is connected to every single bubble here right but I mean that's kind of what the article was about but.  But I guess the question is like you pointed out it's not always direct right, so the discrimination might go through mental health to behavioral issues right or or vice versa, and so let's let's draw some more lines so discrimination to wear let's focus on that part.  What about this one.  How does that interact with.  Public discrimination influence the education that someone receives.  It would be similar to like discrimination and health, as well as any like institutional licensees like not that like cultural competency training of, whether it be like teachers or health care providers.  Oh yeah.  yeah it's a cultural sensitivity so.  I wish I could remember the name of this book is a book that some something to the effect of.  It how to teach black boys or something like that it's a book for teachers and like I assume it's targeted towards white teachers, but like how you approach and interact with African American.  boys a particular and I haven't had the bug is not, as the title I know that's the general idea.  But there is like sensitivities that are specific to different groups and like if you're not aware of that, even if you do have the purest of intentions and you really want to be a good teacher if you don't know how to navigate those interactions effectively that may interfere with.  your ability to force a child to learn yeah.  yeah that's awesome I mean there's also the the more obvious things where.  Discrimination just there's all these preconceptions that you know say African Americans are lazy or they are more mature somehow.  That can influence how teachers like implicitly influence how teachers interact with them, moreover, ones.  What about this one.  How much education interact with discrimination Hawaii education or someone's education reinforce discriminatory practices.  i'm not sure if that's why i'm asking what has been a lack of education will continue to perpetuate the stereotype that reservation.  think that was my thought any other thoughts about that direction.  On certain curriculums might have certain things are discriminatory.  Is.  A big of an example i'm not now with today we're probably called years ago.  omitting things.  From.  yeah that's a great thought to that I hadn't had, of course, on so later in the Semester to gymkhana he's been he's one of the members of our team that developed this course he is in the wheelock school and getting his PhD in education.  and his like major focus is inclusive pedagogy in science, in particular, so how do you teach science in an inclusive way rather than exclusionary way.  Right so that's not necessarily discrimination per se that's like how like you were saying how education how how what what is the pedagogical approach and how might a pedagogue pedagogical approach teaching science exclude some people.  which then leads to this feedback loop of you know people who feel left out dance and the pedagogy doesn't enable them to learn as effectively as they otherwise might if the pedagogy was inclusive.  That can be back into this this loop and sustain like discriminatory attitudes yeah that's great.  So what else want to draw the line but.  yeah I think once or anything as communities had for after the equation.  Is in our society, we associate especially higher education with more successful people more.  People will contribute more because society does that really look up again morality there.  or against yeah inherent value associated education, so I think when you see that certain groups don't are not necessarily had an inner housing, education by me for some people's preconceived notions about those groups and then they're more like native itself also.  sounds like a feedback loop.  Otherwise, that people find interesting or we should draw.  there's a clear one to mental health and behavioral issues.  Because I haven't mental health issues, my insurance, like our behavior that affects the person and people yeah.  Absolutely I.  mean this is top two, but so many there are many, apparently, if I remember correctly, many interactions between police.  And people that end in poor outcomes there's some sort of mental health.  aspect involved.  Which is tragic because of police officer, is not the right resource in that circumstance, most likely, but the minute, but because the mental health manifests as behavioral issues you don't know what's happening, the person, mind you just see the behavior.  can lead to this.  More lines are we kind of tapped out, this is a pretty heavy I would say.

**no speaker (00:42:37.530):** way exactly social.

**Adam Labadorf (00:42:40.920):**  I put that so these circles are modifiable but one of the things that they mentioned in the article is how important your social network is.  Both for a support perspective, but also at your social context, and if you are of low socio economic status you're more likely to be in places that have higher crime, and there are social aspects, like the social that's what I mean by the social context.

**Melisa Osborne (00:43:10.380):**  So, in that sense, with social context could both lead to discrimination but also be an inhibitor of discrimination right if we're thinking about this in terms of like you know, a neuro neuron diagram.  As in what.  In one social context you might.  encounter more and then another social context you might encounter less depending on.  hmm these other things like, for instance, education can be used to change social context right.  For better or for worse.  I don't know if that fits with what the article was trying to get across but.

**Adam Labadorf (00:44:09.150):**  I don't know the room.  I guess yeah cuz social context is pretty broad based thinking about immediate like social networks, I guess that the article mentioned that activism and protective.  factors will help like having a really strong social network, and I think often like you do actually see that more in my over at that is.  So that was something interesting social network yes.  This is getting to be about as messy as I was imagining it would be.  Are we missing anything big.  Probably.  All right, well let's move on to the second part of the of the question.  So, clearly, all of these.  separate but related factors influence one another.  so happy we intervene in this a deeper like break one of these lines, if you plant, but if you could.  Which one would you start.  socioeconomic status is like the easiest way to introduce stability into people's lives because, like you know the country hates poor people and giving resources to people who need it most, I feel like.  You know that was that was a poor people making more money in a leader this like you know buying more thing to like materially.  improve your lifestyle also decreases environmental stresses in life, you know interpersonal stressors as well and it gives you more time off to spend with your family and other line quality lightning.  So what you're suggesting is that improving socio economic status might be the first thing to improving mitigating all these outward Duchess that that idea Okay, they thought about that.  tip about that I said i'm gonna go on to you.  Okay.  I think that maybe the first.  Time, I guess, for lack of better words education is because it can affect people on very early in life, and I think in directly or indirectly or directly related to basically every other bubble here, so these are all the related.  lighting engineer education, where you're directly affect socioeconomic status with them effectively America other thing.  I think it's pretty.  easy to approve them socioeconomic status, like providing more funding schools, for example in a more like.  A.  year ago.  But that was gonna be my next question of improving socio economic status overall or improving education which of those two you think is more tractable.  And it's just easier to grasp, improving education, because, like there's so many different factors that go into social economic status it's not like you change one thing about society and then everything about it improves I feel like.  You know, socio economic status is composed of a lot of these circles, we have on the board, so you can't really just like you know be great to just have one quick fix, but I feel I guess, this is a very really enjoyable first stuff.  That you know people also generally i've been care about education in this country and it's you know fairly valued like public asset.  So I feel like it's accessible, like the entire country makes it pretty individually as a place to start.  yeah it's certainly easier to understand, like we all have a notion of what good in a good education about education as.  And, well, I mean I may not be simple to improve education and we may not agree on how to do that, I agree, I think, education is far more tractable than just saying let's make people like for anymore right that's very nebulous.  But of course that's the goal so that's interesting yeah I mean I don't I don't know i'm thinking like what we've done appear to be drawn graph right so graphing like a mathematical sense, you have concepts and then we have edges between them.  And if we could think about like ordering them like which ones are earlier which ones are later I mean that we don't need to think about it that way, of course, we should address all of these things all at once, but.  At least it, for me it kind of helps to try to decompose the problem it's more management principles right so maybe you have yeah yeah and when we possibly talk about.  Fundamental conference conference right into talking about my dog was your hypertension don't eat good food love that we talked about fundamental questions and over again.  Reasons right why somebody is sick or why there are disparities and.  and discrimination, being one on the right and the definition of on the positive that it persists and it manifests itself, as these other things, and it usually involves.  allocation of resources, and so, even if you've got rid of, say, you know oh like now your schools are better right, it still needs disparity because they impact other things like say access to food and like.  Really, I think the ideal is to say, like, I want to get rid of discrimination and obviously that's very you know he do that right like you have to work into solving problems, but unless there is like.  Some movement to address it like it will always come back right like there are always these disparities discrimination is right now.  you're saying.  I think that is like the the underlying the subtitle of this whole course right, so we can even describe all these different concepts and what the problems are, but how to approach them and solve them is another question.  So I want to make sure any any last comments on this sort of hairball that we've made also another question, am I missing a circle that is obvious to the guys that I didn't think them.  To be.  Connected like political power early you know really did you.  lc.  lc a policy from the big one right.  As far as a factor that influence.  i'm actually I did have another thought I think this fits into social contexts and it's a little contentious so bear with me, but I was thinking something like parenting they mentioned that in the article.  I don't know how to encode that in this.  But in the next article actually so the one about.  The scientific American Article one of the things that they mentioned is.  Just so low socio economic status and Allah static stress have a strong link and it gets stronger the lower than the Cisco socioeconomic status, you go.  But they also mentioned that if you happen to have a very nurturing mother that can offset some of those.  effects and that's, not to say that mothers weren't nurturing nuts, because I say that it's their choice, but with low socio economic status, you have to work right like there are so many other factors that influence that.  Right well let's with that let's move on to the next one.  yeah parenting and social context, I was thinking about that.  It may fall under there, but is is one particular type of has a very strong influence of a social, the social context.

**Melisa Osborne (00:53:18.930):**  Well, I feel like it would be this like link between socio economic status and social context, what like a parenting arrow almost.  If you wanted to start to get into the detail of labeling your arrows.  And how these things influence one another.

**no speaker (00:53:36.000):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:53:39.360):**  This thing's already a hairball so.  cool well that worked Okay, but experiment such such great discussion appreciate you doing that.  Oh man.  Okay.

**Melisa Osborne (00:53:56.910):**  oops.

**Adam Labadorf (00:53:58.440):**  Okay, well, I guess, this.  marks that's said stay all right let's move on to the next one.  So this, this is just to help.

**Melisa Osborne (00:54:12.240):**  One of the questions I asked for the.

**Adam Labadorf (00:54:13.440):**  next reading.  has to do with this plot and so i'm just putting that out there for reference, so you could please again.  Separate into your groups, and this, the second one is more about biology and more about.  The actual sources of biological stress and weathering that last time.

**no speaker (00:55:30.210):** On the. Most. stable. Our next.

**Adam Labadorf (00:56:24.900):**  session.

**no speaker (00:56:38.970):** I was. Always. Just like oh. My.

**Adam Labadorf (00:56:48.420):**  and also how hide.

**no speaker (00:57:16.140):** It.

**Adam Labadorf (00:57:20.940):**  This in the process of acquiring.  And again, I don't.

**no speaker (00:57:28.140):** want. us not. Only civil war. You.

**Adam Labadorf (00:57:41.760):**  Know working.

**no speaker (00:57:47.730):** In. fun enjoy.

**Adam Labadorf (00:58:05.130):**  Being out.

**no speaker (00:58:08.550):** there.

**Adam Labadorf (00:58:10.050):**  But yeah anyway, but the last.  one.

**no speaker (00:58:19.050):** I heard. That is. Probably the most.

**Adam Labadorf (00:58:25.800):**  out so yeah I think the idea of this doesn't feel normal to have problems earlier talking.  emotional understanding of much help so.

**no speaker (00:58:39.960):** passionate. well. After. That. we'll. have more than. Working on both options and there's other things are. very obvious ones rates. But all.

**Adam Labadorf (00:59:47.970):**  Topics such as home.

**no speaker (00:59:50.460):** alone molecule.

**Adam Labadorf (00:59:54.060):**  They have too much of a modern, you have a family, they began with a very good model.  Whereas in my recent years.  have been there are more.  yellow.

**no speaker (01:00:14.700):** So.

**Adam Labadorf (01:00:17.040):**  Good long long.

**no speaker (01:00:58.830):** Oh. well. You. ready to move on to more of that. yeah. it's a. baby. sure. thanks for what you have.

**Adam Labadorf (01:03:12.720):**  Now.  asked.

**no speaker (01:03:17.520):** For. Meeting. Saying. well.

**Adam Labadorf (01:03:27.600):**  we're self development.  Yes.  It does yes in the larger.  Your time or to help them or not.

**no speaker (01:04:27.390):** what's. up.

**Adam Labadorf (01:04:32.640):**  Oh.

**no speaker (01:04:34.230):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (01:05:00.960):**  All right, you guys got something done.  Discussing we'll see.  Okay let's bring it back.  This one was not quite as quite as high as I would think, as the previous one, but our previous discussion did some work for us and this one.  I was thinking about rephrasing that first Question No, I said no, this interaction between.  Alastair stress and socio social factors.  And know if you were to intervene in this weird you intervene, but of course we just talked about like you would want to intervene everywhere, you can pick one, but you have to start somewhere.  And alternate alternate.  phrasing of my question is.  let's say that you could either spend money to develop a drug that would eliminate the toxic effects of Alice static stress.  Or you could take that money and invest it in like social programs, you know the one.  let's start with the hypothetical if there was such a drug.  And let's say it works and everybody to reduce the biological effects of stress.  What impact do you think I would have.  I don't think everybody would pay him like what is being discussed that with the medical establishment so every play you know and people pills, and the tape is to be a lot of stress and beyond that.  You you're not really addressing what causes like Sarah said oh great point I didn't think to specify right I didn't even occur to me that people wouldn't take the pill let's just say that people were.  Like let's say they do let's say you get a raise the biological effects of systemic stress.  yeah kind of going on that you're still going to have the mental health component of stress link here eliminate one of us excellent i'll be back to your calls.  So it's like Katrina simpler right.  let's say you put on let's say that that developing a drug that did that is more tractable, then the other big like purple we were talking about before.  might be worth it like sometimes treating symptoms that helps you feel better.  that's kind of an ethic, or if you can hear you aren't eating at my audible don't have a systemic selling things like it feels uncomfortable sailing yeah.  you'll feel the stress, but you're certainly not going to make as much money as everybody else right you're not going to have the same opportunities like.  Oh that's a really interesting point so, in fact, it may exacerbate problem, because it makes those conditions more tolerable which what does that mean it means that conditions are going to get works that's a really.  Any other thoughts on that.  um I feel like sometimes bustle removing stress my lead to a ball on reacting to situations which are the best when people are stressed out they.  Stress sometimes beneficial to like another situation.  War isn't hard to handle it, since they were supposed to too hard to treat your book there's a difference yeah that's that's interesting point too, I mean I think they mentioned that in the scientific American article that inflammation is a double edged sword.  Right like if they're the system is there to protect us, but when it is chronic and on it.  and apply at the wrong time, you can actually harm us.  So yeah reducing stress may, in some instances costs to some broad cause some problems like that, because it's your sort of interfering with that natural system, which is designed to protect us perhaps.  But I guess what i'm thinking is this drug would mitigate the effects of the chronic inflammation chronic stress we're talking about um but like.  That idea is i'm sure if there was such a scenario, there would be on intended an unanticipated consequences.  Right almost always when you start tweaking things like that you never know what's going to happen, and so it that brings up that makes me think like such a thing never happened right like there would never be a drug that is Minister for this generic.  thing does have that problem right like doctors, they only they have their own says don't do no harm that has to be enough evidence that this particular drug is but as indication, so this is type entirely hypothetical so.  Any other any other thoughts about like so it will is there any benefit and trying to ameliorate the biological effects of chronic stress.  Even appear yeah absolutely because I mean valuables and so while it's very like central to our lives so it's necessary to address those but it's not.  You can't it can't be presented as like an either or like biological health has to be addressed, but they do have to be addressed as well because.  Basically, valuable help solving not if we were only to address that would be a short term solution, essentially So yes, it has to be addressed, but it has to be done in tandem with addressing the underlying social problems.

**no speaker (01:11:00.570):** But.

**Adam Labadorf (01:11:01.770):**  Any other thoughts on.  yeah it's tricky right.  All right, what do you guys think of these plots.  I heard some really great comments from the audience, while you were discussing.  Look at the top last one.  So at the top 20% of the income of the top 20% of the population, provided by the income of the bottom 20% of the population.  So what that means the top 20% of earners in the US make eight times as much as the lowest 20% actually feels a little below I would expect to be larger.  This is also 2005 so who knows.  Are there any hidden assumptions of guesswork on your on.  Your.  strengths and happen like you know coverage, or better than that now kickers like also there's a problem with salaries and sometimes.  don't feel as much so it's like they don't person as passionate as you would say entering the patient will things I also learned some really healthy healthy Germans have been like you're happy patients.  Right oh yeah for sure.  Or, or maybe clinicians are equally passionate but they don't have the same resources to like support themselves, while supporting others so there's all sorts of reasons but that's I mean you're hinting at something that I was hoping to to ask like.  United States in Portugal.  How do they compare as countries.  it's an intentionally big question.  Right.  Because I don't know lots of ways, the populations are different population sizes are different, the infrastructures different government systems are different, I have no idea, Portugal has universal health care, maybe does.  Geography drastically different.  And so i'm not i'm not saying I disagree with.  That plot.  But.  there's like each country is a dot which means they're sort of like saying well we're comparing all these countries as dots right, but like which one which one is of them have universal care, but doesn't say that which ones have them have.  You know income inequality, but what about the like.  The magnitude.  Particular population 2 million that's maybe Massachusetts.  I think definitely the r.  US has like 300 million, or something.  and also what countries aren't there.  You know, besides, most of them.  Any Asian right.  So what does that comparison mean service How are we supposed to interpret that I am not sure.  i'm.  This is, I mean this is just an observation and speculation.  But if you look at the access from left to right.  See, like the traditionally like Nordic top of the racial hierarchy sort of in a historic sense, and as you go to the right like started getting like Italy and an island and.  And these places that may not have been considered on top, the original hierarchy, I have no idea what that means it's just an observation about this particular part.  To that we talked about this a little bit where a lot of those Nordic countries are very like ethnically and racially homogenous.  And it's, and so they have more income inequality, but in recent years, like as these countries have hi Morgan influx of people of color and the refugees and specially.  All the politicians and those companies are trying to get more and more resistant to like income inequality like more equitable policies because.  There is, you know kind of that racism, there is like Oh, we don't want to show the resources we have these people call it comes to our country so very interesting that.  Like obviously the zoia to access plot so race isn't represented here, but you definitely have to like think about what other factors are not being represented when you consider this.  Beautiful quote.  was exactly the point that I was hoping to make plots like they are deceptively simple.  And they're measuring something and they're showing some sort of a trend, but when you started to dig into it a little bit like first off 2005 a couple things in the world what happens is these 2000 bucks.  The Arab Spring, but 2006.  And 11 or remember, I mean that that was a huge of people major change the there's so many changes that have happened since that one was this article published I don't remember someone had.  Last year.  Oh man I didn't even think about that, but that makes this these plots even more suspects right like how to date is this.

**Melisa Osborne (01:17:25.500):**  Oh wow.

**Adam Labadorf (01:17:26.940):**  I didn't even they didn't even take a look at that oh man, is it really points with 128 2018 that's fine doesn't five.

**Melisa Osborne (01:17:39.810):**  That was another lifetime.

**Adam Labadorf (01:17:42.570):**  Oh, my goodness okay I didn't even know that, but these numbers mean like what are they trying to say here and it's the same thing, obviously applies to the States right like.  Each State is a dot and so there's somehow saying that there's some sort of equivalency between the States, but there's tremendous differences does anyone notice the geographic.  hadn't.  And so I mean might the geography of the different States and the legacies of those parts of the country have some bearing on this relationship.  Certainly right.  But they presented as the sex symbol like look there's a line for the scatter and I find these like totally uncomfortable and totally unreliable, you would have to do it may be true.  But you'd have to do a lot more investigation to actually convince yourself that it's true these plots don't give you all the information you need to assess that.  And I always add comments will look it up in bonus as well, I feel like one of the more light on each other.  These ones, yes, I, like the group components together and actually that fellas had an effect long run.  Right, I mean they well I imagined that you know they're they're separate for sure, but there, I would say they're they're highly correlated probably right if you have a.  large portion of the population that has lower economic, social, social socio economic status, I imagine, all of these things are in.  It and I guess that's kind of point and guess, there are different components of both you know precisely exactly.  The point that i'm trying to make is that this is a composite score somehow of these factors and research.  are expected to just take it for granted that they combine it in a way that makes sense.  But that's exactly the question you should ask for this pot like what is the data other they come up with these numbers, what does it mean like how do they I guess what life expectancy is yours change births is a rate, I assume, obesity is probably a rate.  How do you make an index of mental health like on a scale of zero to 10 how mentally healthy is a is an entire state like a month.  We just don't know we could read the read the the underlying paper and gather the data but also noticed that this is 2005 and 2019 so.  Get the point that they're trying to make.  And also does this last one US states with higher average income rarely show improved health, do you think that this plot suggests that.  mean in my Community know like yeah maybe the line is actually horizontal if you do a regression or something but it's like bounded by line of the top right right.  The more the higher the the per capita income is, the better the health is, and so I don't I don't know where this where they get off saying that maybe they supported this with another argument but.  that's stood out to me I don't know Melissa do you have a comment on that.  yeah Eurocentric exactly.

**Melisa Osborne (01:21:18.390):**  Well yeah the top part right, I mean, and I mean I point out that when you limit.  It to just considering those areas, you also limit it to like governor like type of government and things like that systems, because if you count.  How many different places, there are in Asia and Africa and the Middle East and all the different systems that are there it's really not an accurate picture of the world or.  But anyway, when it comes to the states, I mean, I think I would be really curious to dig further into what their metric is because.  I mean I don't I don't mean to sound very like pro Massachusetts but i'm very surprised that, on the index of health and social problems Massachusetts would be at minus one like what does that actually mean.  Is it for particular group is it for everybody.  You know, because, like Massachusetts is ranked pretty low here it's ranked with like Montana and North Dakota and like vermont's like below negative one.  I don't even know California is ranked around zero I like.  I just find that very interesting i'm looking at the right bottom graph.  And it's just like not really making very much sense to me.  Because like I would think of.  And, of course, this shows my biases, but I would think of like Oregon or Washington state would have.  pretty good scores in terms of in a better okay i'm confused better or worse okay sorry.  No just ignore me.  hires worse.

**Adam Labadorf (01:23:15.480):**  Which is also.  But regardless.

**Melisa Osborne (01:23:18.570):**  Like if this is a magic formula like.  You know.

**Adam Labadorf (01:23:24.540):**  Well visually I think it supports the argument that the author is trying to make if you don't like dig down and actually ask questions of the plot like, of course, does and but I will say these points down here below the access that is just lazy like.  Is this is a noxious like what what it is like putting better at the bottom and worse on the top like Why would you do that that's that feels kind of into me.  Maybe because they wanted us to be on the top because us being on the bottom, I mean who knows who that God why they do that but.  But they didn't know that scientific American come on houses shredders.

**Melisa Osborne (01:24:00.750):**  Well, I would I would think just from the standpoint of these all these little things here on the right, I think it will be better if you had like a.  bar graph that show.  A breakdown, but anyway.  But I don't we could we could probably pick all day.

**Adam Labadorf (01:24:25.350):**  So.  That that was Okay, so that was what I was that's the part that I wanted to make these parts that don't just trust the plot by the apparent choices there's so much that can be buried in a plot.  Every plot requires scrutiny and that's hard and any last comments about this before we move on to the annotation.  Right.  Alright, we didn't really I mean I love the discussions there you guys, especially fabulous I learned so much from you guys every time we talk about these you know.  The problem with that is not don't leave as much time for the annotation discussion you otherwise might have.  So, first, I just want to open this up was there any questions or things that we'd like to have clarified about the piano in this Indian study.  If not, then this against split up into groups love about.  30 minutes.  And then we'll go up with actual extra questions.

**Melisa Osborne (01:26:31.170):**  gracious we want to jam board.  Okay.

**Adam Labadorf (01:26:53.820):**  nope.

**Melisa Osborne (01:26:55.140):**  Oh, you could just use the copy, I think.

**Adam Labadorf (01:26:57.570):**  I made a copy of a copy it's gonna sorry the gender is going to be blurry.  Then.

**Melisa Osborne (01:27:25.920):**  yeah just share.  Announcements down there.

**Adam Labadorf (01:27:53.160):**  Tell me.

**Melisa Osborne (01:28:12.240):**  You are a million times faster at that than I am for true.

**Adam Labadorf (01:28:18.930):**  by us but do I do it right.

**Melisa Osborne (01:28:21.600):**  Now.

**Adam Labadorf (01:28:27.000):**  No one has to be just like I type A lot faster when I drank a lot of coffee, but my typing accuracy goes way down so effective way I typed in CSP.  In one page.  Ladies.  giving them.  Right.  So, Melissa.  yeah I was thinking about i'm extending the chaos that ensued headlines today.

**Melisa Osborne (01:29:27.150):**  Fine.

**Adam Labadorf (01:29:28.050):**  But just because i'm going to be spending Thursday I don't know we don't discuss the case studies do we discuss the case studies, want to do.

**Melisa Osborne (01:29:38.130):**  Now what.  Do.

**Adam Labadorf (01:29:41.070):**  They do, and then.

**Melisa Osborne (01:29:42.390):**  yeah yeah.  So I would say the person to coordinate with on on that would be to recess and she's the one that's going to be reading.

**Adam Labadorf (01:29:52.560):**  Over oh I won't change it done.

**Melisa Osborne (01:29:55.470):**  So.

**Adam Labadorf (01:29:59.010):**  Timing it to to the discussion Sections I guess.

**Melisa Osborne (01:30:05.010):**  yeah no, I think, actually, I think it would make sense to have it stay do this week because, if I recall correctly, next week.  Part of the discussion is actually case study three because we're going to be doing Ai and there's like a whole.  back.  yeah so basically there's.  nephrology paper but there's also case study three.  You don't like.  You don't necessarily have to have everybody talks.  In groups about case studies.

**Adam Labadorf (01:30:44.940):**  yeah.

**Melisa Osborne (01:30:49.410):**  it's one of those things where we really.  do that, like the first one, just so that everybody feels.  yeah.  And these are all about like algorithm algorithmic bias.  There are.

**Adam Labadorf (01:31:10.170):**  There are a lot of work.

**Melisa Osborne (01:31:11.580):**  there's just a lot of.  papers in this list.  For possible case study for everyone here i'll show you if you look at it it's like.  us.

**no speaker (01:31:25.050):** On.

**Melisa Osborne (01:31:33.840):**  Oh, we have to change the thing at the top, this is not do Friday November.

**Adam Labadorf (01:31:39.960):**  You have six months.

**Melisa Osborne (01:31:42.330):**  Yes, exactly.

**Adam Labadorf (01:31:45.000):**  yeah good.  luck tip that I found is that the smallest number of dates and new materials as possible.

**Melisa Osborne (01:31:59.130):**  or real well I also don't think it's weeknight anymore.

**Adam Labadorf (01:32:03.540):**  Oh okay all right case.

**Melisa Osborne (01:32:10.320):**  And we're kind of off when it comes to weeks because we're kind of like straddling weeks now, instead of.

**Adam Labadorf (01:32:18.750):**  boundaries.

**Melisa Osborne (01:32:22.590):**  There you go that's great I like that we're not.  Content weeks.  We should title the content week one.  That would be awesome.

**no speaker (01:32:46.650):** know.

**Adam Labadorf (01:32:52.860):**  As i've been going through up in rooms like making a calendar agnostic.

**Melisa Osborne (01:33:01.320):**  I think that's good.  Especially because once we're trying to adapt things for the wheelock unit everything goes out the window.

**Adam Labadorf (01:33:21.030):**  Being here.

**Melisa Osborne (01:33:29.580):**  Oh yeah that's what I was trying to call it out when we have.  Some case studies when you're like it's not due for a really long time case study three oh, we need to put a.

**no speaker (01:33:42.120):** proposal on the horizon.

**Melisa Osborne (01:33:46.890):**  Proposal for the final project.  needs to get on the horizon.  it's not super urgent but it's it will be in a week or two.  So I think.

**Adam Labadorf (01:34:02.040):**  Next year.

**Melisa Osborne (01:34:03.330):**  Oh, my God that's next week.  I have so here, it says next Thursday we assign the project proposals.

**Adam Labadorf (01:34:13.560):**  i've been going through and.  tweaking that.

**Melisa Osborne (01:34:17.520):**  Okay, good okay so on your radar.

**Adam Labadorf (01:34:20.400):**  it's on my radar.  It is a just in time for the situation's.  part but you know.

**Melisa Osborne (01:34:28.770):**  That.

**Adam Labadorf (01:34:29.460):**  The only one kind of like just in time on time right.

**Melisa Osborne (01:34:35.130):**  I mean the good thing here is that it looks like i'll be able to interact a little bit by the time the proposal stuff comes in, because it's like late April so.  I mean i'm sure I will be very busy but I won't be like totally off the map anymore so.

**no speaker (01:34:54.450):** i'm Sir.

**Adam Labadorf (01:34:57.930):**  Around the dark side of the moon.

**Melisa Osborne (01:35:00.450):**  I know.

**Adam Labadorf (01:35:01.170):**  The other side.

**Melisa Osborne (01:35:04.710):**  Exactly.

**Adam Labadorf (01:35:09.000):**  based.

**no speaker (01:35:14.400):** On. yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (01:35:54.510):**  yeah.  yeah.

**no speaker (01:36:03.810):** there.

**Adam Labadorf (01:36:05.430):**  As.  well.  As manage that, on a message you.  Can.  Like it has all been told that yeah sorry.  Oh yeah.  yeah one in one.  No.  No i'm watching.  More.

**no speaker (01:37:06.240):** About. me.

**Adam Labadorf (01:37:16.350):**  Like.  A grill looks.  Like.  you're doing.  Nothing no.  yeah.  yeah.  Some.  Like.

**no speaker (01:38:07.890):** This.

**Adam Labadorf (01:38:14.670):**  Is a.  couple here.  today.  Alright sounds like people are done.  She.  wants to go first what's the overall claim.  Rapid modernization dramatic change is that led to their inquiries of attachments in the female.  The high rates of monetization is the cause of.  Diabetes and these other issues.  agree.  yeah I agree with that.  Who is making the claim.  Nobody.  sees two professors from northern Arizona university they're both in like that at all sizes and human services which I guess is a little bit different than some have read papers are mostly biologists geneticists, so I think that remembering.  Things so which department, you say they're in will wants Department of Health sciences college of health and human services, possibly social work.  As well as health sciences.  So what, if any influence do you think that back from Prize on the way that information was presented.  I really like they kind of kept thinking populations really being part of this study I really appreciate about it was cool and they weren't.  They weren't always just like spewing out backs and really long time describing the history of these populations.  In humanizing them right which.  A scientist might not have been quite so.  I wouldn't say scientists aren't inclined to do that sort of thing, but that might not be the focus like.  yeah oh that's great.  This is a review Article though right.  Now.  Technically it didn't read like one right, I mean they do talk about a lot of studies, but they I agree with you they've been having incorporate and they provide context and it's it's not written like a dry review Article.  And so, who is making this claim as.  Is it the authors that are making the claim, I mean yes.  But they're backing it up by studies that a lot of other people have concluded I don't know if anyone did additional research into this I didn't but.  I wonder what work in this area was not cited is this literally all of the studies that have been published in pima Indians this whole population, or are there, others i'm not sure i'm just not sure it's a question that occurred.  So you know who is making the claim the authors are making the claim that you know others have made this claim based on if that's just something that the mind.  into this one should be pretty clear, to whom is this claim applied.  So the idea of explicitly applying to the phoenix Arizona and new Mexico before things I felt like because of the fly it too broad population meddling modernization.  Of info, but this was at least one, and this is, I don't remember do the authors try to make that generalization.  anywhere in the conclusion, they talked about yeah just implementing mechanisms for modern nation developing wall, like the third time.  So they they do make the claim that this these findings generalize.  Is that true.  And it could be.  There was another group that they started hearing some of the studies which group is that.  Remember.  So same environment, the different genetic background I guess the idea so don't remember what the genetic background of that group was.  dimension if.

**no speaker (01:44:02.700):** you compare wrong.

**Adam Labadorf (01:44:08.760):**  I don't know so Mike the answer my question was a European descent, I think they said, the non team, and you can group was a European descent, or something like that which I don't know what that means.  Like who is that group than that they compared to because it sort of baked into that claim they're like well here's another group of people who has a very similar, I guess, there was saying very similar environment.  But a different genetic makeup.  And I mean i'm sure they like it would have taken a lot of work for them to like actually do the genetics and figure out what the best friend was so i'm not criticizing them for doing that, but it is unclear.  I just saying this is another group of people, where the environment is similar, but the the genetics are different and they use that as some of their claims, some of the studies use that person has some of the claims.  The people find that convincing.  Those comparisons of the pima Indians and Mexico to the non Indians and Mexico.  I don't remember what the results are at different rates of things, I think that higher diabetes and obesity and the non human being, your call Center number.  Alright, so clearly the evidence that they're providing is about painting and people and then this other adjacent group.  Who do you think they're speaking to who's the audience.  Scientists.  hey can you give me.  A give me a great point about the sort of narrative and context that they provide the style of writing it doesn't feel it science paper exactly.  that's a something about their audience the intended audience.  I don't even remember the journal, what was the journal published and actually called current obesity reports to see how it's.  Very specific yeah who would read that.

**no speaker (01:46:34.920):** There in. person.

**Adam Labadorf (01:46:38.910):**  Maybe conditions epidemiologists maybe.  social workers, maybe.  And a sidebar question to that so let's say that you know the and we haven't really talked about this, and this is speculation, but the authors are making a claim.  And they're making a claim to a particular group of people when you're doing that you're basically trying to convince someone of something every paper you're trying to convince someone of something or possibly to do something.  Which kind of suggests that that group needs convincing.  Right, because if everyone already agrees with it, then you don't really need to make an argument.  So then.  i'm not sure of is that back to a question that I wanted a response for, but it was just a note right.  So this last one I mean anyone want to volunteer.  Because the payment implicitly or explicitly include or exclude certain groups.  Besides the obvious poverty.  How much information that they provided about the payment and tribes.  Some.  There was a there was a sentence in there.  It was like in 300 BC the the people, the pima Indians moved into this area which at the time was a part of Mexico Mexico existed.  The country of Mexico exists in the Grand ubc according to that because I don't know what they meant by that like what is currently Mexico.  Or was apparently the US, but I do want to talk about talking to do you remember those sentence I don't know what.

**Melisa Osborne (01:48:59.460):**  Did you see did you see my note it's like seriously been plagiarized from every like the same sentence occurs and like 50 Google searches, if you like.  If you just Google, the hope hohokam moved into the gila river valley at that time still Mexican territory it like pops up Britannica things and like.  Other articles, this article, and they all like bury it to some people are like what is currently Arizona like and some people write it like this way, and some people write it and different but they all use the same sentence, and it was it's kind of like plagiarism.  So don't do that.  don't plagiarize Britannica because I will Google it and find out.

**Adam Labadorf (01:50:04.710):**  So I guess in this last one is pretty obvious in this case right you're talking about the me Indians and one group of non human beings that have some kind of background, that is not clear.  But like we mentioned the claim seems to be somewhat broad spanning.  they're saying that well this happened in this one group of people, and so, therefore, we could expect to happen in order to people which.  may be true, the last comment i'll make number nine over is i'm.  Actually I don't even remember if I mentioned this, but this is one of those rare circumstances where there's like a natural controlled experiments.  About humans happened it's not actually an experiment it's just the conditions allow you to do make these comparisons that have a clear interpretation or so they say, and that is very rare that you actually get things like that.  and obviously it's not necessarily usually not ethical to design certain things like that, but I mean it does happen in like um.  I think there was an example in Oregon where they had a lottery for receiving help like Nike medicaid.  That was another an opportunity wasn't designed to the study of course it was just there's limited funds, and they have to distribute it somehow so.  They had the forethought to organize that as a study and then compare the people who did it did not get it so that was another good example about as close as we can get to ethically run you know clinical experiments on people on their health.  But these are really rare these sort of situations are really rare and I mean you had to have had to put your the people that moved into an area 300 BC that may or may not have been Arizona or Mexico or wherever it was.  and have them stay in that area and then have the you know the country's diplomacy politics sort of split things up, in that way, like it's really hard to find cases like this.  So there's a reason why they focus on and on again to your point it's so great that the authors did at least do credit where credit was due.  Okay we're over.  On Thursday we'll talk about algorithmic bias.  Remember.  Feedback loops.

**Melisa Osborne (01:52:25.290):**  Feedback loops and proceed.

**Adam Labadorf (01:52:29.760):**  On to the assignments do Thursday.  Before us yeah how did you do before and.

**no speaker (01:52:39.870):** I think.

**Melisa Osborne (01:52:41.280):**  say.  If you get it done before that's great, but like it's really just do Thursday.

**Adam Labadorf (01:52:48.810):**  Will there be like a drop dropbox link last time.

**Melisa Osborne (01:52:52.020):**  yeah so so we're going to have to make a dropbox for that, I think you have the shared folder Adam.

**Adam Labadorf (01:52:58.590):**  yeah we'll figure that out internally.

**Melisa Osborne (01:53:00.570):**  And we also have to assign.  Everybody to annotations in perusal and we do tend to make the annotations do it when class starts on Thursday.

**Adam Labadorf (01:53:13.560):**  Thanks.

**Felicity Crawford (01:53:16.710):**  bye.

**Melisa Osborne (01:53:18.090):**  bye felicity.

**Felicity Crawford (01:53:20.340):**  move.

