---
---

# Discussion (Case studies)

**Date:** 2/10/2022

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:00.719):**  So reporting.  Okay Oh, and I liked your important dedication to so alright so today's dedication, is to victims of eugenics policies in terms of the fact that.  This is very wide and also many of them are name lists in the records.  So this kind of stems from the reading for the week right so i'm in medical apartheid Chapter eight was a sign and it opens talking about fanny whose name or who was a very famous civil rights activist.  and also a victim of eugenics sterilization and so there's a little more there you want to think about that there's also.  You know, in the case studies we're going to see many people who are kind of victims of this thing going into this day and then something that's like even still scarily ongoing is the sterilization of indigenous women within the United States, Canada.

**Felicity Crawford (00:01:05.760):**  Here, your screen.

**Melisa Osborne (00:01:07.380):**  haha oh sorry i'm sorry felicity.  Thank you.  So sorry about that that's really important.  And yeah, and so the indigenous women that are still being.  victim of those policies and it's, sad to say that these examples are just like three little examples of how this has happened systemically from really.  And we talked about on Tuesday how like California all the past lives against sterilization of people in 2014 which is you know so recently so.  Okay alright so that's the headspace that wouldn't make it.  And then.  Okay, so announcements.  So we are going to be ending class at 230 today, and so the reason behind this and it's something that I think we should have on the radar and I should tell you about so um.  I think it's so, as you know, I am expecting in my due date haven't told you this, but my due dates equal six.  But the last 24 hours i've had some signs that I might be doing preterm Labor.  So i'm being monitored and stuff like that, and so I just wanted to let you know so that's why I have to leave at 230 because I need to take another steroids shot for the babies lugs it exactly 345.  So everything's well i'm well he's well they're cool but it might mean that things get scrambled up with who's around when, in the next few weeks.  So i've been talking with Fred wasserman and Labrador who are co instructors that, as you see, in the schedule are coming on in a week or two anyway.  But bill start joining our class regularly Tuesday and Thursday starting next week as a way to just be prepped in case I get told I have said, not commune to or I get told or I actually do go into Labor who knows, and so I just want to be transparent about the X.  And so, unfortunately I had every intention of getting the group analysis done Tuesday and Wednesday and then that didn't happen so.  All things being considered, I should have that done tomorrow and so here's my plan for these group analyses so first of all I realized, I never mentioned they're not graded.  It was it, this is really just so you get some feedback before you do your case study next week, so I really I want you to have them back by tomorrow.  And so I want you to use the feedback, and so what i'll do is I will annotate the submissions you gave me an email them to everybody in your groups so that you will all have a copy of those feedbacks Okay, and then you can feel free to contact me if questions come up or anything.  And then the other thing that I wanted to mention that's really important.  Oh, and for anyone who's watching this or who wasn't here for the discussion last week so there's no penalty on your group assignment that you weren't here and I will basically share a feedback with you from a group so that you have something to go off of.  And so, if you're worried about it please feel free to reach out to me via email or anything if you're like hey I wasn't here and I just want to remind you need to send me a separate email.  But i'll configure it out from the.  Other thing was that there is a template on poops.  That I want everyone to be aware of.  You don't have to use the templates but it's there for you, if you want.  And some of the groups already had turned things in last week, using this.  So actually.  get this over to the right place.  Okay, so we're in the library resumes sharing on zoom in here guys.  So we're over here in the library.  Go course home on the scroll bar up here.  head over to library.  And then case study examples instrument examples, open up this folder you can scroll down.  You want case study one template.  You click on this open this document you can download you can download it if you can't i'll change it, so you can.  So it just kind of the different papers that was analyzed but basically you're going to annotate your paper and perusal per usual.  I am going to make a Google form that you can submit which case that you pick and then everyone will get assigned.  The one they pick but all of the annotations you have done up to now, or you continue to do will get propagated into your assignment as soon as I assign it to you so you're not going to have to enter anything new.  All you gotta do is go and read it like you normally do for class and it'll show up that you annotated it for me so it's very straightforward now, the thing about the analysis is.  you're going to need to do this in a document that you're then going to submit so i'm going to send everybody.  A dropbox link via group email, and also, it will be posted here in perusal.  Under announcements.  Go back to course home.  Actually scroll down, so I don't know if you've noticed this but I use announcements a lot for doing the links and stuff so like the group notebooks pinned here now.  The discussion jam board goes up, and so I will put case study one submission link and pin it to the top of this, so, then you can just click on it and put your file so it'll be real, it will be really easy.  yeah go back to course home library.  And let me just make sure.  Yes, you can download this and then edit it as you see fit.  Any questions about everything.  that's all the administrative stuff I have.  Yes, yeah.  yeah this is do February 17 next Thursday.

**no speaker (00:08:34.620):** yep.

**Melisa Osborne (00:08:37.590):**  And I guess it is important to note, you should keep in mind, there is a paper to be annotated for next week, too, so you are technically going to have.  Two assignments that are you you're going to need to annotate next week's paper for discussion and you're going to want to submit your case study.  But i'm hoping, many of you have gotten started and thinking about the annotations for your case studies so that won't be like you're doing to me annotations just for the same day.

**no speaker (00:09:05.910):** So.

**Melisa Osborne (00:09:08.100):**  hint hint don't leave both until Wednesday night..  So with that okay so let's get into discussion things so like I said we're going to wrap it to 30 today..  I don't think we usually go over that anyway so i'm not really concerned, but just putting it out there.

