---
---

# Measuring Intelligence - Science and Society/Genome Wide Association/Genetic Testing

**Date:** 2/24/2022

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:02:08.400):**  hey guys.

**Adam Labadorf (00:02:13.470):**  hey Fred.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:02:15.570):**  Adam how you doing.  Hello.

**Adam Labadorf (00:02:22.920):**  Okay.

**no speaker (00:02:36.210):** First.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:03:19.260):**  Okay.  Hello.  And again.  I feel I don't see, oh no she is okay there that's either.  So so Melissa has an atom is here as well, and what we have to start is a look at the dedication and this is an extremely relevant one.  Agnes Managua.  Is a physician she's a pediatrician and she really has done a lot on getting physicians prepare to treat patients now, the reason why this is so relevant is because partners in health you, you might have heard about, and he poor farmer.  passed away in Rwanda and you don't know what he was doing there and how what he was doing but i'm sure that.  This is a person who has been able to take on a great deal of.  work to get the.  program set up, I read the an article in the globe, this morning, if you will, if you look at it, about how in Rwanda, they set up a hospital and they did it in a way to make it very.  functional because, instead of having air going through ducks you don't want the way that worked and that he had to reset and you know and i'm pretty sure that.  Dr Bennett but I will, how was probably very highly evolved with that, so this is one of those very special people Okay, so what I want to do to start is finish up a little bit of what we did last time and then move on and I thought it would be valuable for you just to take a look.  At a short little video that i've set up for you here.  I stopped sharing yeah.  So.  Oh sure the sound sure Thank you Okay, so what I want to do is just show you.  little bit of.  The work that lewington had done and I don't think you've had an opportunity to actually see him before and it's always good to just get a feeling for what these people were like so let me.

**no speaker (00:06:18.030):** start.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:06:37.980):**  SUP that, let me just try to get rid of that for a second.

**no speaker (00:06:42.780):** Let me try.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:06:46.020):**  and share.  Alright, so this.  If you remember from the class last time.  Professor as one had said she went to a presentation at the brooklyn high school alright so race an illusion of it was called the illusion of race or something like that.  And it was a two hour show that was on PBS and the part that they saw was up students.  working within a groups, and in that show that was just about five six minutes of a little bit where you can actually see lewington and it makes the point that we've been trying to make where he started this and 72 with that paper so let's hope that you enjoy this.  The problem for evolutionists and population geneticists was always.  To try to actually characterize how much genetic variation that was between individuals and groups and I spent a lot of time worrying about that, like other people in my profession.  In the 1960s, Richard lewington decided to find out just how much genetic variation fell within and how much between the groups, we regard as races.

**no speaker (00:08:38.370):** A new technology enabled him to do pioneering work and that method which is called gel electro for Rhesus a very fancy name. We were able to use on any organism at all if you could grind it up, you could do it. That included people, and you have to grind the whole person, but you could take a little bit of tissue or blood. Over the years, a lot of data were gathered by anthropologists and geneticists looking at blood group genes and protein jeans and other kinds of genes from all over the world, I mean anthropologist just one around taking blood out of everybody. I must say, if I were a South American Indian I wouldn't let them take my blood, but they did, and so I thought well we've got enough of these data let's see what it tells us about the differences between human groups. Nonsense findings were a milestone in the study of race and biology.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:09:33.630):**  If you put it all together we've now got that for proteins for blood groups and now with DNA sequencing we have it for DNA sequence differences, it always comes out the same.

**no speaker (00:09:47.100):** 85% of all the variation among human beings is between any two individuals within any local population between individuals within Sweden or within the the Chinese or the cuckoo the Icelanders. To put it another way of the small amount of variation in our genes there is apt to be as much difference between fortress and her teammate Christine as there is between gorgeous and her opponent cater. To individuals within any so called race, maybe it's different from each other, as they are from any individual in another so called race. The people can we call black more like each other than they are like people who we call white genetically speaking. The answer is no there's as much or more diversity and genetic difference within any racial group, as there is between people of different racial groups. Still, we know that some jeans are found with greater frequency in some populations.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:11:02.100):**  In a geography, is the better way to explain that more than race or anything else, there can be accumulation of genes in one place of the globe and another.

**no speaker (00:11:17.580):** race does not account for patterns of genetic variation. Our recency as a species and the way we have moved and mated throughout our history does. Our human lineage originated in Africa. About 2 million years ago small groups of early hominids not modern humans began a first migration out of Africa to the far reaches of the globe breeding isolated lineages. It was a long thought and it's still believed by some that those first lineages lead to genetically distinct races that are with us today. It turns out that's not true, I think there's almost genetic proof now I wouldn't say the issues totally resolved. That those lineages just died out the neanderthals in Europe died, the door actors in Asia died, but there was a second migration. of our modern species homo sapiens and that all modern humans have products of the second migration, which is probably less than 100,000 years old, by the best current evidence. Some of those movements may follow major migrations as agricultural people came into Europe as people across the Bering strait in came into the Americas. uh but other movements are much more subtle they're smaller groups of individuals that move or the genes move from place to place and time to time. we've had maybe 100,000 years of having genes move out in mix and bria sort and countless different ways. 100,000 years may seem like a long time, but in evolutionary terms, it is a blink of the. human populations have not been isolated from each other, long enough to evolve into separate subspecies. It just hasn't been time for the development of much genetic variation except that which regulates some very superficial features like skin color and hair phone. But once the old cliche is true under the skin, we really are effectively the same and we get fooled because some of the visual differences are quite noticeable.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:14:04.140):**  Okay, so in this film there, this is all so we talked a great deal about what we know today what was what did most of it is correct What was it that wasn't correct anybody.  What would you say.  Was it as simple as one migration out those there any connection, now we know about to the neanderthals to death did denisova from Russia.  See, this was a starting point and it was a very, very important starting point and the understanding of that race does not exist as a biological construct this is what glue glue Internet told us this is what Louisiana done alright so let's let's move on and.  Go back to the PowerPoint.  Question yes finish.  This thought we thought at that time, when that film was made, they were a died out and didn't didn't debris.  Only in the last I guess it's almost 15 years now that they discovered that we as human beings today hold if you have.  A European descent an Asian descent, you have about two to 4% of your DNA is Neanderthal and that meant that there wasn't a breeding.  And it's even more it's even a little bit more complicated than that what has happened as well, is that there was migration back into Africa.  And it was bringing back that gene that lead to light skin.  And there's what they call a ghost population we don't know what they what they were like but they came back into Africa, so it wasn't a simple as the way he presented it.  But the key point, which I think is so relevant is that we share within a population 85% of human variation.  And it's it's means that we are all basically the same, I think that that question a little point where they looked at one young woman from one team and compared it to the woman from the other team.  And it would be the case that you would think that she would share more jeans with the men with the members of our own team, not necessarily true, so I think that's that's that's the driving but that's the driving home point okay so let's take a look at this.  and move on.  Alright, so that's today's now.  All humans, and this is the basically from Professor is going slides i'm stolen from her all human share almost all the DNA effect that betrays our recent origins from Africa.  The genetic difference between us those small account for much, but not all the physical variation we see rss so once again, I asked you the question look around the room.  See who you think he would be most closely related to is probably inevitable that it is not the case.  All right now, the idea of systemic racism and science is what this course is all about, so we have ideas about how this all plays out it starts out with the notice.  And you did that already, and you know that you set it up where he has his hierarchy.  And immediately people begin to think about the top of the hierarchy is European the bottom of the hierarchy is of African descent.  And this is what was going on for hundreds of years and this is how people thought.  And one of the interesting things that I found recently now social Darwinism is basically genes that control various behaviors and.  And they've been selected, one thing that I found to be interesting, is this last spot where people began to measure the skulls and determine what suppose the race they belong to, so it turns out.  That a couple weeks ago well almost a couple months ago there was an article in the Boston globe.  And I would like your opinion about this so here's what happens for a forensic anthropologist they tried to take a look at a skull.  And then they determine dispose of that person's race, so you know let's say there's a body that has been found and it's sitting somewhere and then taking a look, and they try to describe what it's like.  So the fact that ancestry estimation, sometimes work does not in any way, shape or form mean that races are biological categories, they had apologists know that, but what is happening here in this particular paper is.  That, if you want to do this, the question is, should you.  Because what you're doing is working on the basis of creating a racial difference, simply by looking at this.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:19:20.520):**  And Fred Oh yes, actually actually want to point out something from poppies.  popular culture, how many of you have watched the show both.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:19:31.290):**  phones.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:19:33.000):**  watch that.  TV show.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:19:35.220):**  I remember that one that was a no.  Go ahead go ahead.  well.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:19:41.220):**  there's this whole thing, where they have an artist on the team, who is supposed to be able to completely recap read like calculate what a person looks like based on their score.  And it's accepted as they can do it, and they should do it and and that kind of thing but it's funny because when we started talking about this class, we were talking about the TV show bones in like whoa wait is that accurate like or not so yeah.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:20:14.190):**  that's my two, so no, it was no but.  That it's so it's so interesting because, even if it is accurate you've got to be very careful how you do it, let me show you, I want to go to the article that came out in the globe, if I can.  Okay, let me show you this.  Make sure i've got it here.  that's not it.  Alright, so here's the article.  And you just got to take a glance of what they're saying now, these are people that actually admit that it makes sense that you can do that.  And i've just read a couple parts of this so.  When burn who is white is now question whether she should continue to do so.  And she's not the only one over the past year debate about ancestry estimation has exploded in US forensic anthropology with a flurry of papers examining its accuracy integrating its methods and question its assumptions.  So, like your opinion, should they continue to do it, there are people that feel it's still somewhat accurate and if you go and you know you can take a look at this it's you know it's there, but if you take a look at this.  You can see many of the unknown individuals that come to us are from disenfranchised populations.  As Williams, who is black when you take off the table as a parameter that could help somebody get on to their family.  That then it's not the greater it's not the greater good it's to actually stop so you have questions, but the point being that this is only 80% correct.  If it's actually a European and it drops down to 20% correct if it's a person who is not from Africa European descent.  So there's a lot of stuff going on, but it fits right into our you know our mechanism here of of what what should be done what should not be done and I, and I don't have an answer for you, but I think it's it's something to think about.

**no speaker (00:22:42.900):** Okay.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:22:52.350):**  back to the PowerPoint.  Okay, so um yeah keeps coming up alright so mechanisms of the heredity so you start with Morgan stuyvesant.  The bridges Molar you know the mechanism and deviant and error, so we know that you look at sex sex link trace all that sex chromosomes.  And please Melissa Adam you guys chime in anytime you want, so what happened after World War Two and the book makes this pretty clear superior.  Is that it seemed as if the harmful effects of eugenics was on old now was it really, however, and it probably wasn't on, let me talk a little bit about that for a second don't chew.  And I will.  ask you know, maybe, many of you haven't heard of whoopi goldberg but the amanda I know you did hear about this did anybody else hear about what was said.  No Okay, let me, let me sort of explain what went on, there is a show that is every morning with the people I don't know what station and so on, and Melissa do you know it's it's on an 11am right.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:24:15.780):**  it's called the view and that's on at 11 it has a rotation of like for women, discussing a lot of current events and.  interviewing celebrities of.  The day.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:24:28.140):**  All right.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:24:28.530):**  Now we've been rolling.  What he's been on it for years.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:24:31.980):**  For years, all right now she is an African American she's a black woman and she made a comment that got her suspended for two weeks.  Now I want you guys to think about what she said, and tell me whether or not you think it makes sense now, we talked about the whole course and it keeps coming up and up and up in politics today where people are.  Creating wearing the star the Holocaust to actually putting on a faceless and you know these these are.  Things that you that don't make sense, but in this case here's a woman that's far to the left and she's very clearly defining what races.  Now I want you to think about that for a second, because what she's saying is that the only type of race, issues that we should be consider if it's black on white.  And she dismisses the Holy cost Holocaust as a racial issue she says and quote here white people doing it to white people, so you all go fight among yourselves so in in many ways she's saying to us that when somebody says.  former president of the United States that it was the Chinese flu he's creating a racial description and creating prejudice creating animosity and creating problems now what be goldberg is not a bad person.  She is but, again, this is a current person who has a audience of millions.  And she's telling the world that there is no such thing as prejudice against this case Jewish people and here is a quote from Hitler the Jews are undoubtedly erased, but they are not human.  What I have for you, here is an editor a op ED piece from the Boston Globe again now, I cold Melissa yesterday, I would not show the clip, but do you want to see it's up to you, if you want to see what would be Gilbert said.  Are you interested yes okay let's let's see if I can do that.  This is.  A person who is.  Here it is okay i've got to stop sharing please make sure that I am.  doing it correctly, because i'm not used to the MAC and it drives me a little crazy.  Okay.  Melissa do you see it at all, what do I have to stop sharing.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:27:29.640):**  um I think it's loading right.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:27:32.580):**  It is loading, so you do see it okay.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:27:34.890):**  I can see the window.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:27:36.750):**  yeah it's here okay.  we'll take a second now.  The point isn't that what we go where it gets a bad person, but it just struck me as a person that doesn't quite get it, there is no biological construct of race, and we should be concerned with prejudice that goes beyond black on white.  to live yeah.  To the race.  For this one.  hear it.  So here is what she said, and it got us to spend it now remember this, is the let's talk about what our over so yesterday, we talked about.  Today, so.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:28:30.570):**  Dave maybe tomorrow we won't talk about the crazy ladies, are you, and then the crazy ladies, have you tried it because.

**no speaker (00:28:40.440):** You are doing their show on ABC. 11am Eastern I can't watch it live, thank God. afterwards. Anyway, they was all costs morial day and they were talking about anything today we'll talk about Holocaust without kind of denying while the Holocaust happened, but that was just a bit too much for miss will be goldberg. will also if you're going to do this, then let's be truthful about because kind of.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:29:11.970):**  Just a bit too much you know it's not about.

**no speaker (00:29:18.570):** it's not about race it's not about that because it's about man's inhumanity to man that's what it's about but it's about a white supremacy wow. And you see these a troll might groups of people without a bath to black. Is white and they were missing the point you're missing the point yeah I mean it you turn it into race it goes down this alley let's talk about it for what it is it's how people treat each other. it's a problem it doesn't matter if you're black or white, because black white Jews it's hot everybody eats each other so, is it. If you're uncomfortable if you hear about mouse, should you be worried should your child say oh my God I, I wonder if that's me no that's not what they're gonna say they're gonna say I don't want to be like that well hopefully. it'd be cool yeah and, in most cases, most kids they don't want.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:30:19.500):**  People comparing to the young.  Parents vaccinations to what am Franklin yeah, so it is necessary for kids to learn about.  man.  To man, however, it exposes itself have to cut you off, I just want to say that was banned and it flew to the top 20 of amazon's rules laughing yes.  Alright first off, I feel like I owe you guys an apology every time we play a clip from the view actually yesterday, you may remember, we were going to show you a clip.  From Rachel maddow on msnbc and we had a little hiccup with the computer there and I saw a lot of people in the comments going Dave we want to thank your technical people.  But being unable to show that clip because I show you these people and they're all bananas, and yet we all know, we have to do it because we have to expose.  The nonsense now first off, I just want to be very, very clear about something, because I know we all rushed to judge everybody we all try to destroy and cancel everybody.  I do not think will be goldberg is an Anti Semite in any way okay I don't as a matter of fact, I think, her real name is Karen Walker.  And one of the reasons reasons that she told chose the name whoopi goldberg goldberg obviously being a Jewish name was because she was around.  A lot of Jewish people when she was growing up, she lived.  In the inner city and there were a lot of Jews and black people that lived in similar neighborhoods right by each other and she was very influenced by Jewish people, I have no doubt that will be over does not hold hatred in her heart.  To Jewish people, but what you see in that clip is how confused everyone gets because of woke isn't that because she has chosen the woke ideology as as her main.  ethos in life, that this is the set of beliefs, that she puts above everything else you can see how it basically destroys any sensible way of talking about anything, obviously.  Obviously, everyone knows this like this is like basic basic stuff the Nazis considered the Jews another race, they did not consider them white right like this is basic Nazi 101.  So she's confused there because she is now racialized everything so to her race can only mean something about skin color.  I will I can't believe i'm going to do it, but i'm going to give joy, a little credit joy, who has gone off the deep end but yeah at the beginning of that clip when.  we'll be right, so the question that I have for you is what about this course, because in fact what we're learning in this class is how.  People who are black or mistreated in terms of medicine in terms of what sciences that.  So, even though she's wrong what we should be thinking about is that in many ways it is black on white in this particular environment that we're in this class now I could be wrong, and I would like your opinion as to whether or not you think i'm wrong.  What do you guys say is that she was suspended and she was big and because she discounted the fact that it was a racial situation, though.  And she was defining races black on white and that's it and we know from what we've been teaching, you are trying to teach you is that there is no biological construct of race, but what about here, what are we doing, and let me just proceed, no one has an opinion.  May I ask, if I can get an opinion, if you don't mind, do you mind Ryan, do you have any opinion on which.  Obviously, a very complicated issue.

**no speaker (00:34:02.730):** trivializing that murder 6000 people to racism. Is it isn't a matter of. race there isn't another ethnicity, because.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:34:21.120):**  You can be ethnically Jewish but.  As someone who's not Jewish i'm curious know would choose people identify them more self ethically as Jewish racially I just.  So so many ways, what she would say it's more ethically ethnically and you're right i'm not disagreeing I actually agree yes ma'am just goes to show how like me been talking about this, the whole time but phrases only use as a social thing and so people.  Think use it for their own purposes right, you know, like you're talking about the Holocaust very clearly the Nazi party didn't say that they are a different race because it's a way of other people it's like very clearly, marking the line between us and them and.  You know, I think.  I mean it's tough I don't know like, if I can see.  How she got to that point and made that you know right assumption um.  yeah, especially the world we live in an opinion.  What do you think yeah um.  yeah I think it's hard to like.  to study the fact that there is no biological basis to race without talking about race right and then trying to negate everything that we learned.  And for her claim.  yeah I think it was just it's more the fact that it's discounting a cool experience of the Holocaust and that's fine that's great if we don't see Jewish people but that's not the case wasn't there.  something to think about all right, we move on.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:36:10.410):**  On Fred.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:36:13.680):**  Good.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:36:15.510):**  And I actually wanted to point out something that my so I put it in the chat on zoom.  I can send it out on perusal later, but our ta from last semester Devlin actually sent this to me today this morning.  There was a really interesting and sort of detailed thread on Twitter about Albert Einstein.  And some of the things he did, as a scientist to counter racism within science and he actually saw racism against Jews and racism against black people.  as being very closely related very interwoven in his actions you know, he would give he gave lectures to black men about physics.  In a time when no one would do that he joined the N double a CP in the 40s and he's he was actually rather outspoken and he said, these are the same things he was able to find this like common humanity and.  You know.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:37:20.040):**  No, you know what is interesting there, though I always.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:37:23.490):**  like to point that out.

**no speaker (00:37:24.960):** Because.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:37:26.610):**  I think.  You need to.  focus on the the the black and white, but what amanda was saying about it being a moving target is really one of the things that we've tried to emphasize in the class is that people adjust you know.  Think how they judge race, based on a moving target and sometimes it's convenient for it to be based on skin color but sometimes it's more convenient for it to be based on something like whether someone's Jewish versus you know dordick.  and  That has changed throughout the course of American history and you're we focus a lot on the US the class so.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:38:12.720):**  Now, did you know that Einstein was also criticized for some of this comments about.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:38:17.730):**  I didn't know that and it's interesting because in this thread they they point that out, and they also say that it's kind of like a science and society thing that nobody is perfect.  And you know every once in a Malcolm, and I mean honestly that holds for whoopi goldberg to.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:38:39.960):**  Yes, but you know it is, it is interesting that he was being I didn't I didn't see that, so he was actually been credited with being anti racist and that's pretty good that's nice i'm glad to hear that all right, we move.  We move on, we move on.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:38:59.370):**  Sorry.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:39:00.390):**  No, no, please, this is your class, I want you to do, and you know more, much more about these things that I do all right.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:39:09.150):**  And I actually I want to say to the students, this is not a comfortable thing to talk about and I have props to all of you for being so brave.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:39:20.610):**  OK and OK, and now.  In the.  Book superior, there is a mention in a couple of the chapters of this book called mankind quarterly now I never heard of this until last week when Melissa pointed it out.  And when I started reading about it in the in the book and it's scary because it is today, this is going on today, so what this was about was that people who then we're writing racist.  Comments couldn't get them published they couldn't get them out anywhere, so what they did was they created their own journal.  called mankind quarterly and it was created in 1961 and, once again, these this slide is from Melissa and she talks about you know this crazy journal that has all these people that are promoting racist ideas, and this is from.  melissa's.  Power up present date as slide decks as well, and it goes these and many other statements of the same tenure, which appeared in gar garrett's review prompted.  they're just reaction of several anthropologists biological racism, to judge from the first issue of mankind quarterly is being revived.  These are people who couldn't get this stuff published anywhere So where is it now so Okay, I went online and I took a look at what's there today, you would not believe it.  This was the this was one that I put in and it's from December 1 2021 i'll just read to you the first statement in this.  human populations may diverge genetically, not only are their anatomy but also in their mental characteristics, which is what we're going to be talking about.  Our species is not too young for the differentiation.  And therefore, what this adjusting the out of Africa theory does that all it's not as if we didn't have enough time to devolve these different characteristics.  And what's amazing when you read the rest of this is it's the same material that we've been trying to discount.  That was discounted in 1951 with UNESCO and yet it's still out there, this is your world that you're going to inherit you got to do something about this, this is something that is remarkable to me.  And again it's not the science they're not publishing scientific papers, the poaching popup they seem to me to put publishing commentary.  And the commentary is promoting the racist ideas that have been there and it gets worse, I mean it's it's we're going to talk a little bit about.  This guy Charles will talk a lot about this guy's Charles Murray in class next time and and we have.  He wrote something called the bell curve will be talking about that and the fellow you saw on the film, by the way, lewington.  passed away a few months ago at the age of 92 and Stephen Jay gould was probably the leading evolutionary biologist.  In the country for many years, and he unfortunately died in a while it's been spent about 1520 years now, but go made.  took some of these ideas about racism and he he he wrote a book, which is, in this case, it was called.  The miss measure by any measure and he wrote a number of things to counter this idea that genes control everything and I just want to point out two comments that he had made, which I think are relevant, so how many of you think that there is a large complex genetic component to what.  Everybody is okay, he pointed out, however, if he went to a village in an obscure place maybe in the Amazon.  And you had the people there and the average height was five foot six inches and then you tip that population and you provided a reasonable good diet good exercise good health, you come back and it might be five feet 10 inches is the high.  So it's genetic but there's an enormous environmental component to that the other comment, he made is a disease genetic disorder called Fino kettle honor on an area.  And it's a it's something that is 100% genetic is a gene that causes it, but if you were to be fed a particular type of.  Food diet at birth, you know close the birth you solve it, and it doesn't exist so he's talking about how, no matter what you think about a genetic component.  There is a huge environmental component that controls so we'll talk more about Google than a later point okay next.  And we got to work together on this one, because this is actually interested and if you don't mind Would you mind helping me out on this Okay, and all right, how many of you have ever heard of them doing work on twin studies to determine the genetic component.  All right, it's a guy named bouchard from Minnesota it was always called the Minnesota twins sense, which I always thought was funny because in baseball takes good Minnesota twins.  All right, but it's a remarkable simple way in which they an hour they go about determining the genetic component now you're going to help me with this okay.  Now any characteristic is environmentally and genetically determined correct Okay, so they did models I got it twins which are hundred percent related, and then only comparison on a figure like this is to dies I got a twins raise together.  Now I want you to think really deeply about what that means.  So if you have environment, and you have genetics, the people who are in this case is a correlation and verbal ability, I, like the one spatial ability little bit more, and so twins are being tested and the tests that they be given says that 62% correlate.  Now they share 100% in the genes and if they're identical twins you're assuming they share 100% of their environment.  Now dies I got it twins are missing one component of that.  They share let's say 50% of their genes and let's assume that they're treated equally and 100% of their environment.  Now, you will be amazed at how simple this becomes.  Therefore, what component of the genes is missing in the comparison between models I got twins read together compared to dies I got a twins read together.  Yes, that's correct.  What is dies I got it once what's the relationship to each other.  That can be 50% related like any other brother and sister well any other sibling because you're assuming boys, the boys so think about this for one second.  If the only component, that is missing is 50% jeans then, if you took 62 subtracted 34 this is how they did this that's 28 28% correlation is equivalent to 50% of the genes.  Therefore, double that 56% of the correlation would be due to 100% of the genes.  And if you read these papers, that is what they do.  That is the determination.  And it went through the literature for year after year after year, and they made it a standard way of doing things so when you came to something like this, which is spatial ability any type of intelligence, they came to a conclusion that genes control 5658 60% of the effect on the behavior.  Now I point that out because I want to later on i'm going to give you a quote in the next PowerPoint by the guy that did this work, because he retired.  And in science, he has this article, and it absolutely shocked me because, when you read superior he's actually mentioned and he's mentioned as one of the group that would be writing papers for mankind.  He actually talks about how women are inferior to men and people are afraid to tell you that.  it's frightening because I always looked at these studies as relevant Melissa do you want to add to that.  Oh that's a.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:49:30.600):**  Nice.  here.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:49:33.450):**  What do you think.  Did you know that if apple shot.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:49:38.190):**  No, I did not so I did.  Scientists.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:49:42.510):**  yeah he will be there will be there will be getting back to them that's okay so that's there Okay, this is going to lead us into looking at IQ and and.  And the genetic basis to it Okay, so a letter is in this particular one just to help you out figuring it out models I got it twins read together at five.  And then you looking at fraternal twins which are also what we call dies I got it when we're together 5858 subtract 85 is 2727 times two is 54% that's how they do this.  that's how they do it.  Okay let's move on.  Right now i'm not gonna.  Professor Labrador did a fantastic job with the genome i'm not going to go through that, but there are a couple things i'm going to do.  And I want to do it in a way that I would just some things that I think need clarification.  Even though you guys are biologists, and you have good knowledge of this there's some terms that you know I want to clarify like.  I mean, I even thought of putting it into slide that says what is synonymous versus a non synonymous substitution is would that help you is that something that's clear to everybody.  And you know better Okay, I think it's the selective sweep that bothered me and I wanted to display that a little bit what.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:51:07.770):**  I think we did talk about synonymous, and not synonymous, we did sickle cell in.

**no speaker (00:51:13.950):** Good.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:51:16.140):**  Excellent okay so i'm going to sort of skip through this stuff on the genome Oh, I think you need a film.  I think you do it's going to be good okay Now let me explain something to you, there is a.  A.  PBS public radio has a series of films that they've been making over the last three years for PBS ions and they do an absolutely wonderful job.  From my verbal ology class, because nobody I don't understand it, because you have, though they put out a film yesterday.  That always on the evolution of creatures that are moving on to land, it was like eight minutes, and it was perfect and this one is perfect for us that actually to that and i'll show you this one, and let me.  sort of explain what it is it's two people and we're all related to each other, and I think they do a really good job and it will lead us into what I want to do with a selective sweet so i'm going to go to this.  girl this.  though is that it.  No that's not it.  Well, maybe i'll get rid of that.  Okay let's do it let's get back to this.  I just do it this way.  And these are very good, very sciences excellent they do talk very fast.

**no speaker (00:53:11.850):** You have the materials inside you right now to unlock the story of your deep distant ancestry. And also mine that's currently because you have mitochondria in yourselves and you got them only from your mother, not your father and if, on your 23rd pair of chromosomes you have an x and a y like I do. Rather than an excellent X, then you got that y chromosome only from your father together these two facts mean that there's an unbroken line of mothers and mothers mothers who passed down the DNA and their mitochondria for hundreds of millennia. Creating a biological thread that connects you to a single female ancestor regardless of your gender and it also means that there's a lineage of fathers and fathers fathers who passed on their y chromosome uninterrupted leading back to the single male ancestor. Okay Now I know what this might sound like i'm not talking about the first two people i'm talking about two humans who lived at different times in the distant past about 200,000 to 300,000 years ago. i'm talking about two people who never met, but who, because of this odd quirk of genetics, combined with some unique evolutionary circumstances, managed to pass on a very small fraction of their genomes to you. And to be to all of us, and this is an incredibly powerful tool for studying where we all came from we're only beginning to understand the legacy of these two people to whom are all related to legacy that goes back some 10,000 generations.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:54:29.100):**  let's talk about where this legacy begins in your own cells your mitochondria other small structures that produce energy for yourselves.  And there are relics from a time within 2 billion, years ago, when our ancestor was single cells.  And at some point it engulfed another single celled organism and started using it as an energy supply.  As a result, mitochondria today still have their own if very short genomes this is your mitochondrial DNA or empty DNA.  And it's only passed down from the mother because egg cells have lots of mitochondria but sperm cells only have a little and they're destroyed after fertilization.  Meanwhile, the y chromosome is a smaller of the two sex chromosomes X and y.  People with an x and y instead of two axes are physiologically male and there's a reason we study mitochondrial genomes and y chromosomes to understand our ancestry.  Actually, two reasons, because they have two important things in common their genomes are both pretty short and they also don't recombine.  Okay here's what that means, and the process of creating sperm and egg sales our chromosomes lineup and exchange information.  Matching pairs of chromosomes swap arms or legs with each other, this molecular dose ido is known as recombination.  And that means that offspring will have slightly different combinations of genes on each of its chromosomes then it's parents had this is basically how sex creates new genetic variations, but y chromosomes are much smaller than nexus.  And, unlike the rest of our chromosomes it doesn't match it's partner.  So it doesn't recombine with the X and the mitochondrial genome doesn't be combined with anything either because it doesn't have her partner to combine with.  All of this means that these two snippets of genetic information get passed on almost unchanged from parent to offspring.  which makes them traceable through time so for decades, scientists have been studying these two bits of information.  And they tell two stories about our history, there are slightly different but still complement each other, for example, what are the most important things we have learned about ourselves from mitochondrial DNA is a story of human migration.  Even though it's passed on from mother to child without recombining empty DNA does slowly accumulate mutations and as those mutations get passed on within the population, they start to form of genetic patterns within that group.  This allows scientists to organize us into genetically similar groups called haplogroups.  Anyone who's used a DNA test kit has heard of these So if you and another person to share most of these mitochondrial mutations, then you belong to the same haplogroup and decades of research into empty DNA has shown that the vast majority of haplogroup diversity.  exists inside Africa, for example, there are several haplogroups that are only found in Africa or among people of African descent.  These are groups like l zero l one L two and four or five and six, but the whole rest of the world is represented by parts of only one haplogroup that's l three.  So if you're of non African descent you belong to l three, which contains lots of Sub groups like K M and N are which are found among populations outside Africa.  But there are even more subgroups of L for you found within Africa, so what is all this tell us.  Well, for one thing is taking this genetic evidence for what's known as the out of Africa hypothesis.  The hypothesis that modern humans originated in Africa and spread throughout the world, this model was first developed by anthropologist around the 1980s, based on skeletal evidence.  Specifically, the earliest anatomically modern humans that were founded in southern and eastern Africa.  And today, this mitochondrial data is seen as molecular support for that idea, starting with the famous paper published in the journal nature in 1987 that people are detected the first signs of these genetic patterns.  Based on empty DNA sampled from just 147 people from five different geographic populations, but, among other things, that study showed us that there's such a great diversity of haplogroups in Africa.  Because that's where our genetic populations are oldest so when a small group of people migrated out of Africa, they only represented some of the genes in the total human gene pool.  Those migrants became the founders of their own genetic lineages found within the haplogroup l three.  But there was still an older source population in Africa that they used to be part of.  Now they can also use changes to our mitochondrial DNA to estimate when certain lineages split off from each other.  This method is known as the molecular clock which we've mentioned before it's based on the idea that mutations occur and empty DNA at a pretty regular rate.  But since that rate of change isn't the same across all of humanity, the clock needs to be calibrated like, with the help of well dated fossils and even the DNA of ancient fossil humans.  Using this method, scientists have Tracy mutations in all the major lineages of people from haplogroup l three that appear outside of Africa.  Where those non African groups converge in time we find the earliest humans that left Africa and the data suggests that this happened around 70,000 years ago.  and going back even further, it appears that all known haplogroups converge on a single female ancestor who lived roughly 200,000 years ago, so our mitochondrial ancestor can tell us a great deal about where we came from, and when.  But we also have to talk about what she can't tell us she's the first woman of our species or the first anatomically modern human or anyone really special, for that matter, for one thing there's evidence of modern humans as far back as 300,000 years ago in northern Africa.  So we know our species was around long before this woman lived for thousands of generations.  But they're empty DNA just didn't make it to the present day, the fact that one woman passed on her mitochondrial genome to all of us is really just a matter of chance, think of it this way.  In any given generation, a woman might have sons, but not daughters and if she only has sons, that means none of her mitochondrial DNA will get passed on.  So our mitochondrial ancestor is the only person who managed to have one or more female offspring, who, in turn, also had female offspring in an unbroken line for the past 200,000 years.  by sheer chance now, naturally, there are a lot of limitations to what empty DNA can tell us the data provides us aren't very precise and the genomes themselves or small or presenting a tiny fraction of the information that's in our whole genome.  And, of course, the only tell us about half the population females so well empty DNA was crucial as an early source of genetic data a sequencing method started to improve scientists began studying the other non recombining stretch of DNA the y chromosome.  and much of this work was done in early 2000s.  And just as empty DNA can shed light on the growth and spread of certain maternal bloodlines.  The y chromosome can tell us about the migration patterns of some groups of men, for example, a Paris studies in 2010 and 2013 sequence both the y chromosomes and empty DNA from 2740 people across Indonesia.  And the results showed that a surprising amount of y chromosome DNA came from faraway like China, India, Arabia, and even Europe.  Especially in Indonesia Western islands of the island of Borneo, for instance, the presence of the white haplogroup notice oh.  Seven seems to be the fingerprint of immigration of men from Han Dynasty China about 2000 years ago.  But in those same men there mitochondrial DNA more closely resembles local haplogroups so that suggests that at least over the past few thousand years men have been arriving from elsewhere and pairing up with local women.  And when it comes to how far back this y chromosome goes the latest molecular clock calibrations now suggest that are white chromosomal ancestors lived about 200,000 to 300,000 years ago.  Much like with our mitochondrial ancestor this guy must have had at least one male offspring, who, in turn, had more males in an unbroken line for hundreds of millennia.  And we don't really understand why these two individually.  Jules left the indelible mark that they have in our genomes what it is that there might have been a boom in the human population around 200,000 years ago in Africa.  When our species happened to be doing very well for itself, if that were the case, then the offspring of both of those people may just have been more likely to survive and pass on their DNA.  or in the case of our y chromosome ancestor It could be that he had to sort of gang Gus Kahn thing going on.  Adding many, many, many kids, some of whom were son so also went on to have many, many, many kids but the story that these two people can tell us ends when they were born, because we can trace their genetic trail any further back in time.  So to probe the origins of anatomically modern humans, we need earlier sources of data remember the y chromosome and the mitochondrial genome represent just a small fragment of the human genome.  So, to understand the whole range of human diversity, we need to study the whole range of human diversity Luckily, this is the 21st century, and we no longer have to sequence tiny stretches of individual genomes by hand.  We can sequence whole genomes and quickly.  So, as our technology and methods, improve we may soon be able to reach beyond the lives of these two ancestors into the even deeper past.  But even though we do each of us will continue to carry the molecular legacy of one man and one woman who managed to make their mark on all of humanity all right.  What do you get out of that i'm just curious.  always like to know.

**no speaker (01:02:04.410):** Thanks for joining me today for this truly amazing story.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:02:08.010):**  And big wall.

**no speaker (01:02:10.800):** I.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:02:16.740):**  Did you understand, though, why there's a certainty that there was the migration out of that but that's the point that I want to drive home.  Is that what you're looking at is that there's much more diversity in Africa in each of these appetite groups.  And then you're looking at that l three and that's for the rest of the world and the genome work that's being done today supports this out of Africa hypothesis.  And it also supports the idea that we were basically coming from an individual or a pair of individuals that were no older than 200,000 years ago marissa you available.  For question.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:03:02.040):**  Yes, I am.  Sorry.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:03:04.050):**  To unmute myself, so I just wanted to know.  You know this is that I so point.  So do you want to talk about that for a second.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:03:15.090):**  Sure, do you have the slide for it.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:03:17.430):**  sure I do let me go to it.  Okay, well, first let me get i'll get there, so first this is.  This is one of Melissa slides it's about the mitochondria and obviously it's useful to use the mitochondrial DNA to do this type of analysis.  And I know this led to what will eventually we know now is the human genome project.  This particular slide shows that you have all these samples from people around the world, and of course this limitation the limitations are in the sense that we don't know.  Everything we don't have populations from all over the world it's a limited number of populations that we're looking at and that's not good.  So you know, the idea is I don't this is stuff that Professor Labrador did very well talked about the human genome project, and this is where we're going with.  Trying to look at different parts of the world that reflect a different type of genetic signature, so there OK now what I want to do this is the slide that Melissa had on genetic I so point do you want to discuss that for a second Melissa.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:04:34.950):**  yeah sure so.  So this is something that really comes up a lot in Adam rutherford's book how to argue with the racist in terms of thinking about.  sort of.  You know the similarity between all people genetically and so basically the definition for a genetic is a point is the point in time at which every Member of.  An entire historical population of a specific area was an ancestor of the entire current population of that area, so like the idea of.  Key he thinks about this, firstly in terms of Europe, and he uses the example of King Edward the third where basically if you're alive in Great Britain, right now, you everyone there is technically genetically related a little bit to King Edward the third because of.  How many children, he had that kind of thing and so basically it's really interesting when you think about at what point in time, everybody that was alive.  What would be considered an ancestor of everybody alive and present day for Europe that is the point is actually only a little over 1000 years ago, whereas if you actually think about this globally.  So at what point in time, was the population of the world.  Globally, ancestors of everyone that says live in the world today it's only 3000 to 4000 years ago, so it would be estimated at being 143 generations ago and so.  This is just one of those things that's a really interesting kind of thought exercise and thinking about all the genetic diversity that's present present in all 7 billion people on earth today.  You know, was generated from everybody that was alive on earth 4000 years ago, wherever they work.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:06:47.670):**  They do realize what that means 4000 years now.  we've used this example, a couple times, if you look at chimpanzees and Africa.  And you compare the each population of those chimpanzees there's more variability in those populations than there is in the entire human population.  We have only been derived from one ancestor 4000 years ago we are the same, we don't have racial differences, they don't exist we share 85% Melissa do you mind if I show one of the five minute film that make that point.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:07:26.490):**  Go ahead.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:07:27.870):**  Okay let's do that this is also one of those little videos so similar to the other other way they speak very fast, so I apologize for that.

**no speaker (01:07:45.720):** This is you, and these are your ancestors, a huge pyramid stretching into the past and bouncing right on your head. How many ancestors, do you have we have two parents for grandparents and great grandparents for generations back your direct ancestors total 30. If we continue down this line doubling every step just 40 generations ago we'd find a trillion ancestors living at the same time, which is ridiculous. that's not only more people than they've ever been alive it's more stars that are in the Milky Way since our species came on the scene 200,000 years ago, there have been maybe seven or 8000 generations of humans leading up to you. So where are all your missing ancestors clearly there's been some inbreeding. we're not talking banjo playing King of Spain searcy Jamie inbreeding but every family tree inevitably grows forks before tender choices for mates were often limited to as far as you could walk even people like Charles Darwin and Albert Einstein married their first cousins. because so many people with shared ancestors have reproduced our number of actual ancestors is much smaller than what simple math tells us. If we replace that with fancy math factoring and how people move and lived in paired up life expectancy trade geography Genghis Khan, we find something interesting. Every human alive today shares a common ancestor in their family tree and this person lived only around 3000 years ago that's right next time you get a fight with a stranger on the Internet just remember that you share the same great great great great great. Great great grandfather or grandmother, but we don't know who that person was the math tells us, they must have existed, but they didn't leave fossils are artifacts or like a note, or something though writing birthday cards for each year 7.4 billion great great great. Great great grandchildren would have been a nice gesture, but we all carry a record of our ancestors in our genes because DNA is copied over and over every so often a mistake is written. You know, when you make a copy of a copy it doesn't come out a sharp like that, but since most of our DNA can be changed without affecting how things work. Many of these mutations slip through to the next generation these genetic changes accumulate a steady rate through time. So scientists can read them like a molecular clock an estimate how much time has passed and which changes individual share tell us how closely or distantly related they are. Humans seem really different but on a DNA level were remarkably similar groups of chimps and Central Africa living right next to each other, show more genetic variation then we find in the entire human population. This genetic similarity tells us that our species is new in the big scheme of things and then at one point, our population was small maybe you spew is 10,000 of us to put that in perspective that's only a third of your average Bruce springsteen crap.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:10:55.890):**  Sorry boss today any two humans only differ by about one out of 1000 DNA base pairs but our genome is so big that still millions of single letter differences are snips for single nucleotide polymorphous.  We tend to see combinations of these changes chunks of snips associated with different geographic locations.  Are companies that test your DNA ancestry they read thousands of these single letter changes in your genome, to make a sort of signature of your unique genetic variation.  Then they compare your signature to thousands of reference individuals from various parts of the world.  Do a bunch of fancy math to see which parts of your genome, most likely came from certain geographic areas my genetic results pretty much look like this.  my ancestors on both sides of my family are from northern Europe and Scandinavia, which explains my last name why i'm tall why I don't tan and also why I carry more Neanderthal DNA than two thirds of people.  you're confused why I have the internal DNA, you should watch our last video.  I didn't find any surprises, but many people learn about ancestry they didn't know they had where we come from isn't always obvious on the outside.  But DNA doesn't align before using math we identified an ancestor not too long ago thats related to all of us, but that person's genetic influence has been shuffled so much it's invisible in our DNA today.  Is there someone who's genes have been passed on unbroken to today some leftover fingerprint the mother of everyone alive, there is, you have a 47th chromosome it lives in mitochondria are also so.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:12:35.400):**  Okay, so we're doing that again mitochondria used to be free swimming they have their own genetic material i'm like your other 46 chromosomes there's no shuffling when it's.  Between Generations what's more all your mitochondria came from your mother's egg not Okay, so you know again it's going to be.  The situation where we really have not had enough time to separate all right, you guys can take.  You know 10 minute break if you don't want it and then come back Thank you and listen I do go around calling on you, if you were upset with that you don't want me to do it just let me know and I won't do it, but.  very minor questions so, but if it's something that bothers you please come up with money now alright cool take a 10 minute break come on back we'll get back to work i'm going to stop.  Sharing.  and stop.  Recording.  Okay guys sorry I had a little trouble getting back to business alright so.  I think the point here is that we have.  A very good scientific piece of evidence, yes we're very closely related to each other, this is a nice little fill of.  sort of I guess a podcast about the ice appointed, if you want to listen to that one on your own.  Alright, so i'm going to skip the human genome, a professor lab door did a great job on that we'll talk more about it.  However, there is one thing that I feel I have to, I want to address and that's the idea of what a selective sweep is and i'll before we get there, this there is this one slide from Melissa is.  A work that I think needs to be talked about for a second.  And 23 and me, obviously, you all know that people study ancestry and what she was pointed out in this slide is that this is sort of quotes about what's going on genesis genesis of the grappling for years, some more urgently than others with the under representation of black individuals.  So what's happening is she's immediately for them there immediately creating this racial distinction.  Whereas what's really happening is that it's an African ancestry because this idea of race, just doesn't work so.  Within the same.  Two little paragraphs, you can see that this idea about what we're looking at is perpetuating racial differences that we really don't feel and we tried to stress that do not exist, and that was why she put that up and you look at it alright so.  A friend The other thing that I put in which i'm not going to discuss because Professor Labrador if it's going to discuss it later on.  This was an article that also came out from the glow and it's interesting because what we're looking at are the way in which people who are black are not provided with proper medical care.  A common number of, and this is from the Boston Globe about brigham and women's hospital.  A number of common diagnostic tests for hard problems kidney disease even pregnancy, have been adjusted, based on the belief that a patient's key bodily functions can vary significantly depending on race and ethnicity.  race based test can downplay the severity of illness is a black people and mgh mass general hospital and brigham and women's hospital right here in Boston.  No longer just the results of popular test for kidney function now, this goes on and again i'm going to leave this later on for.  Another part of the course where this is going to come up example here urology this stone scores predict the likelihood of kidney stones.  The original race factor is three points for patient identified is not black so we're using race by the color of your skin.  To provide medical care and unfortunately it's not going to work, it is not working as well as you like.  So there are inequities that come out when we treat patients and Lo and behold, of course, they're going on again at these are all examples of how that plays out.  Well Behold i'm not going to get further into it, I did have this example of but i'll skip that it maybe we'll come back to what we did talk about it, however, however.  There was a President of the United States named Donald trump now i'm not criticizing any political view Conservative or liberal it doesn't matter, but what he did.  Was amazing a couple weeks ago, so he said, the left is now rationing life saving therapeutics based on race.  discriminated against the denigrating just denigrating white people to determine who lives and who dies.  This was at a rally that he presented now again i'm not going to deal with any other issues and there's so many others, that you are one side or the other i'm just going to do with this one specific issue.  So he's saying to us that hospitals are, in this case you get it based on race, in fact, the New York state if you're white, you have to go to the back of the line to get medical help.  Now, when you look at this.  It turns out that he's not really being correct there is policies here that say you have to take due diligence, for lack individual that comes out with coven.  Primarily because they're at higher risk, and they want to make sure that they're being treated properly Latino people 2.1 times likely to die.  If you're African American or black 1.9 times so when they look at this, so this is the President, talking to a rally a month ago, correct.  And so what you're looking at he exaggerated new york's guidelines on Saturday by incorrectly claiming that white people are not given the proper tree in comparison to people of color.  So he wasn't corrected what he said, but What did it do to the world we live in, and I don't know if you follow this at all.  But the next couple days, there was a protest in front of brigham and women's hospital.  At that demonstration approximately two dozen neo Nazi stressed and khakis black hoods blackface this was after the President had done this and held up a banner that red black brigham and women's hospital kills whites.  kills ways.  Right now, they distributed photos and two doctors involved in the anti racism equity work at the hospital.  The two doctors Michelle Moss and brand with spillway were looking at inequities in the hospital for years, they were looking at this.  And they found they were writing papers that suggest that we should be treating people equally not other boy, but, equally, and I could stop for a second because I did pull up the paper, which of course is going to be.

**no speaker (01:21:55.560):** let's see.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:22:06.870):**  Well, I guess, I could do it this way, let me do this so wow that's.  So, Melissa had this morning.  sent me a link to the paper they wrote.  which I found to be very interesting.  And here's the paper that they wrote.  and  It was a reasonable paper that takes a look at the inequities we are experienced physicians but, in the early days of the pandemic when we felt like.  Fresh interns nervously waiting it goes on and explains how treatment had been different for people supposedly of different races and how they want to point out those inequities.  The President of the United States, the former President of the United States like speech and people come out and protest against that.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:23:28.290):**  And what.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:23:29.340):**  I know so i'm not sharing.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:23:30.690):**  So one thing I want to mention is you know we talked about this at the beginning of the Semester.  When we point out inequities based on race, so we, in the first lecture we mentioned a specific example of covert and of, especially of maternity care and one thing that is why this is so important, this article about.  Thinking about the problems that are systemic in medicine right is that you know, for when people talked about these things about black and Latino groups, having worse outcomes for coven.  A lot of the conversation at first was Oh well, what's biologically different about that right and that's not.  that's not why they're different outcomes and we'll delve into that a lot once we get into felicities part and the part on epigenetics that these outcomes, have a lot to do with the how the system is set up for socio economics, in parallel with these race distinctions.  That people make based on skin color but that are not truly biological and there's a We always talk about this famous quote by by Dorothy Roberts that you know race isn't biological, but it can kill you.  And this is very much related to that.  And I also wanted to mention that you had been talking about the link about the representation within the 23andme.  genomes data set and the reason that this came up and why put it in his last semester me wet read 1000 genomes project paper, so you know the paper that you read last week.  One of the authors on that paper Adam out and actually went on to 523 pound 23 and me or be one of the cofounders of 23andme and so it's very interesting how that enterprise which can be discussed in terms of not really.  You know, it was a good starting place for reference genome, but you wouldn't necessarily consider it a good representative reference genome and that problem kind of followed him.  where he went at 23 and me in terms of the context of thinking that you know the 23andme database is not a representative database either.  So there's kind of these links.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:26:13.650):**  And that's that's beautiful because that's exactly what Adam was trying and you what you were trying to express last week.  It says that these data sets are not completely adequate I mean that people that do the work know this, but it gets out of end in terms of the interpretation so okay so let's let's move on now so last week I don't know what chapter was she mentioned.  Signing mention mentions Jonathan moths and this book human divert biodiversity and amanda I think.  Very well, spoke up last week about what she feels are important characteristics, to look at, but you know, again, this is where that side but there's more to it.  If you look at this was the genome.  The the genomic work up here was a book written by a man named Robert oldman.  He is also mentioned in the book superior is one of I believe she said, and I did not know this, the founder of the journal mankind.  So he's got that going there and he's trying very hard to say now, we have the genome wide association studies.  And we can use them to demonstrate a genetic effect that is reflecting differences of races now he wrote a book and the book came out.  And this is the review of the book and science, so this is what they said.  The most books message is vintage Genetic determinism okay now here's where I want to go, and I think Adam will do more of this in class on Tuesday.  Is in that chapter in the textbook where they look at our people writing for journals like mankind are having an influence.  And the influence is not good and they're trying to tell you I can use a genome wide association study and prove to you that there is a genetic difference among races.  This is what this man is doing and I think you have to be made aware of the many individuals out there who are trying to influence you society, and it is scary.  It is scary and the person who, I think, is the utmost character in this is a guy named Charles Murray, who we will be talking about next week.  But OK, so what he does is he uses the latest technique, the gw as becomes what apologetic scores, and in this book he repeats and repeats and repeats that there is no allergenic score itself that is causal.  yeah he goes and he does it again and again contradicting himself, arguing that the scores, are in fact causal.  So here's a scientist with credentials as you as they point out it's period, many times and they're being used to influence society.  I mean i'm not talking it just isn't incredibly troubling, so this is a guy Robert flow poehlman and he's I believe in the chapter that you're going to be reading next in the book.  Alright, so I do want to you know move on get through that promised Adam that I would get to the point where he'll be able to talk about some of these things and hear his gws in detail and you've done that.  But my my goal for the next couple minutes is to explain in a term that i'm not sure was clearly made clear to you during the course of the work that we talked about already genetic hitchhiking.  Selective sweep.  Now what I mean is that let's take a look at what they're doing when they create an apple type and please let me know if there was any confusion as to how that played out.  So what I mean is that a mutation arises Now this is focused on a gene for lactose for slack lactose persists this.  And that, and you know this from scientific American it's figures from there, but I want to explain what's going on in these gws is that you've been hearing about and I want to make it clear.  So, if you look at this particular slide this little red one is a slide That gives you the opportunity or the ability, I should say to actually digest lactose.  And that is now with the population of people that is coming in and using cattle in their everyday lives, and they have milk to digest so that gene is highly favored by selection.  Now, the problem is that that gene, as it is selected for will come in with a section of the DNA next with that has nothing to do with lactose digest.  And if the beginning, because crossing over is not perfect it's not just taking one gene it takes the section of the chromosome that includes that one gene.  So that as selection works, you can see that it will these individuals took from this one, at the very top, the entire section of the chromosome that was being next to the gene that selected.  Now over evolutionary time over generated I should say evolutionary time but over generational time.  what's going to happen is that selection won't favor these other plots and we'll just favor this one chain.  And the section surrounding this gene that has been selected for become reduced.  So that you're looking at well this one now is different, the second individual does not have the space between the red in the greenish color is now a blue it's different.  And it's different and it's different and then over next gen next 10 generations is going to be different and that's portion of the genome, that is similar decreases.  That is a selective sweep if you can predict the timeframe, you know when a gene was being selected for.  So now, in this particular paper what you have is the original gene homozygous lactase persistence and we'll let's imagine this data wheel in the red.  Well, the section around the chromosomes has been selected, not for really selected, but it has been hitchhiking genetic hitchhiking with the gene that has been selected.  Then, over time, have you take a long enough period of time those sections decrease so when you would hearing about apple types and selection for a apple type.  that's what they were looking at the happiness type will be selected, it was being reduced, that if you had one trait that was selected a.  10,000 years ago and another 100,000 years ago, you would have a difference in the actual similarity around the gene that was being selected that's the genetic sleep.  And so, with each generation chromosomes pres swap pieces of DNA mixing up the ancestry of the chromosome more and more.  segment ladies reflect how recently, they were incorporated into the genome shorter ones are older, as they have had more time to recombined with unrelated DNA, the result is a mosaic of DNA segments, and with different histories okay.  You know this guy that did the work back in 2010 His name was Pritchard he did a lot of these things, and this was before they had archaic.  Human beings where they could actually say 7000 years old and the gene has entered into northern Europe, so he was estimating the time at which lactose intolerance.  lactose persistence began, and they found relative you few singleton's near the wheels that confer lactose tolerance among the British these ish diesel diesel we'll use the wheels have.  So there'll be a large section of similarity in the genes the team also found fewer single density of genes from blond hair and blue eyes again selected over 2000 years.  And if there was less and less similarity it would have been basically over a long period of time, so please, if you have any question that.  i've found in the past that was something that I think is of interest in him and he's a little bit further explanation alright so that's where we go on that now ah last thing that i'll talk about today.  And this is leads us into the work that Adam will talk about on Tuesday.  We had the okay paper and 74 genome wide significant low sigh associated with the number of years of school and completed we're talking now about genes intelligence.  And that paper came out in 2016 I believe 2016 and it made a point about these genes associated with educational attainment.  Well, turns out now, you can see here they they had to do with a cranial volume go up a slide again, and you can see what they're looking at.  Their their regions of the brain regulating gene expression brain fetal tissue etc so supposedly they're ready and they're intelligent so.  And here is intracranial volume is important, cognitive performance is associated and so that's a gw as.  Well, you know that gives ammunition to upload it to omari to anyone else that's ready to write.  For the mankind they're ready to go they got this stuff.  Their genes control intelligence now of course they're not telling you that genes are associated one race or other for intelligence.  But as amanda said it's maybe a gene that's associated with diabetes with lactose intolerance, something else it's not intelligence is no such thing that you're going to find something that has to do with the ancestry that is there okay.  Well, it turns out that that study educational attainment is primarily determined by environmental factors, this is from the author of the paper.  Studies of genetic analyses of behavioral phenotypes have been prone to misinterpretation, such as characterizing identify identify the associated variance as jeans for education sure they're all.  Does that mean one race as a different set that another such characterization is not correct, for many reasons, educational attainment is primarily determined by environmental factors, the explanatory power of the individual snips is small.  Now it's real but it's small and i'm not saying there are genes that might do up there are geniuses out there, there are people that are brilliant musicians.  Maybe they have something that enables them to do that, but that doesn't mean that it's a racially defined term.  So the candidate change may not be causal of the genetic associations with educational attainment immediately, but multiple intermediate phenotypes, this is the 2016 paper which you read.  turns out that I don't believe you were signed this one.  This is 1.1 million individuals, this is a paper that comes out in nature genetics and 2018.  it's once again looking for a genome wide association study of educational attainment in 1.1 million individuals it's like 10 times the size of any other any other paper that came out.  The snips indicate genes involved the brain development processing neuron to neuron communication.  So this was the end is sort of like the signature paper that has been performed to take a look at the role of jeans and educational attainment.  A joint analysis of educational attainment that three related cognitive phenotypes generates poly gene and scores that explained 11th to 13% that the variance in education attainment.  Now you can debate and we have spoken about this in our group, I feel that's very small, I feel it's tiny, and that means that the Environment controls.  87 to 90% of what education what what educational attainment is, but this is something, but it again it doesn't reflect differences in races, but it's not even important that's not even what i'm trying to drive all.  This paper bike remember correctly, was published by the people cross the River at the broad.  And what they did was they did this in an environment where people said don't do this.  It could be misused by deployments by the murrays by the people who own and run that journal mankind mankind is a journal that has been funded by.  This pioneer institute the drager it's amazing we'll talk more about that, next time, but here is the beauty of this particular paper.  What they did was they decided that we are in a little bit of hot water here we're a little bit of questioning how this can be used so they decided to write a frequently asked question paper about their paper that was three times the size of the paper.  Let me show it to you first of all, they point out the various when scientists publish their research it's rare for them to write in a company frequent has ethic, I never saw that.  I never saw that at all that explains what they found and what it means it's especially rare for that frequency as question to me three times longer than the research paper itself.  But Daniel Benjamin and his colleagues felt the need to do so because they work on a topic that is frequently and easily misunderstood the genetics of education Now let me show you what they did.  They have here are.  A number of questions, did you find the gene for educational attainment well then, did you find the gene which genes for educational attainment and i'll just show you that first question well the one I looking at, I think, is.  What can we get from the study, what can we take away from the study, this is what they write nothing none whatsoever I can't read the question what I have up here I think it's 3.6 3.4.  or whatever, and what it says any practical response individual policy level to this or similarly research would be extremely premature and supported by the science.  Much more researchers still needed to understand why genetic variants we identified are associated with educational attainment.  In this respect, our study is no different than the gws of complex medical outcomes in medical gws studies that, as well as third then identifying genetic variants that predict disease risk is merely a first step to understanding the underlying biology.  Now you got to look at some of these questions, did they find the gene.  Whether the next one, I have is on sisters or brothers and if you just hit one of these is absolutely amazing i'll just show you have stop sharing for a second.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:43:30.420):**  And I I think I want to add here that the fact that there is an faq and that it's 100 pages and so much longer.  And the paper is a really great indicator of just how nuance talking about this type of things become because ultimately.  it's not as you saw from the mitochondrial DNA video and, as we see from thinking about you know even that slide that you showed with rosenberg at all, or from tish COPs.  Talk where you have a whole genome and there's different parts that belong to different people from a different geography.  it's not that there are not differences there, but in thinking about these differences mean there's a gene for intelligence based on race or you know the answer to that is no.  Where mankind quarterly comes in and finds ground is in the fact that there's nuances there and it exploits the fact that these things are very nuanced.  And you know and that's what leads to 100 page rebuttal being published off the BAT because when you work in the field of human genome mix, you know, these things are going to be taken out of hand by.  people that are still trying to apply old standards of scientific racism to monitor things, so I think that's a really, really important takeaway for thinking about this and thinking about the oak Bay paper you know going into reading the oakland Bay paper and analyzing it and see it.  You know this, this is published, there are things that may seem from G was to be associated, but what does it really mean it's interpreting it that is so key to whether you support or are working against scientific racism.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:45:44.700):**  I.  say that having Professor as well and provide the last statement is a wonderful way to end the course for.  Today, but I do encourage you to look at these frequency ask questions it's a relatively interesting have a wonderful day it's Thursday we see you next Tuesday bye bye everybody bye bye group.

**Felicity Crawford (01:46:10.110):**  Thank you.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:46:11.400):**  Thank you for.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:46:13.740):**  me.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:46:14.190):**  hi everybody.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:46:17.640):**  Happy healthy everybody say be healthy.  Come on me.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:46:21.960):**  You guys to be safe and be healthy out there.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:46:26.070):**  snow tomorrow.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:46:26.880):**  bye bye it is gonna snow and campuses in closed.

**Felicity Crawford (01:46:33.390):**  Thank you.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (01:46:34.920):**  Take care felicity.

**no speaker (01:46:36.240):** All right.. Okay.

