---
---

# Human Genomics & The 1000 Genomes Project

**Date:** 2/15/2022

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:04:27.870):**  What goes there.

**Melisa Osborne (00:04:31.980):**  Fred.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:04:32.490):**  Was there hi everybody say.

**Melisa Osborne (00:04:38.730):**  hi everyone.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:04:40.350):**  hi guys.

**Melisa Osborne (00:04:41.760):**  live from my couch it's Tuesday afternoon.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:04:45.150):**  How are you feeling okay.

**Melisa Osborne (00:04:47.070):**  yeah doing good all right.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:04:49.290):**  i'm doing really good.  alright.  let's start with the PowerPoint.  Okay.  So Hello.  I am brainwashed men and i'm not going to be as good as Professor as born, but we'll give it a shot and we try to give you some things that i've been very interested in for a long time.  I know a few of you, I Matthew was sitting there a couple of my classes, is my social conscience so i'm still stuck that.  I know Kemal when you sit in the back of the room on the right and be there and then Chelsea where is caitlin she's an idea.  All right, and then I just like to because this class has a good amount of contribution from the people here, so let me just sort of go through the list so that I learned your names and learn them quickly Okay, and a doula.  A doula Okay, please let me know if there's something I should call you that's you know, not on the list.  Jody God.  OK caitlin I know but she's not here, Ana.  anya audio excuse me i'm sorry hey Jesse okay.  Z on is not here.  comes a little later okay amanda very nice new Ryan, is not here Matthew I know David just one.  Okay Vivian is the back Chelsea you sitting over there.  Athena right there and come on Okay, so the way i'll be doing it is i'm going to take as much direction from.  Professor Osborne as I possibly can i'm going to do the lecture hot for the next few weeks and on the syllabus initially there was an era.  Where we had a Tuesday lecture scheduled next week so that's not going to happen, you guys know that and said what we're going to do is have the.  lecture next Thursday and that this Thursday, which will be a professor, let it let it go it's going to come in and he's going to run the discussion.  Now you know that's something that he's an expert on, and I have never used perusal before my life so it's a little different and i'm going to try, you know, to make.  To do it in a way that will be using many of Professor as well on slides but i'll have to I don't want to I don't want to disrupt her.  What she will be posting so i'm going to do it, but then i'll somehow make my PowerPoint available to all of you and we'll let Professor Labrador.  be able to run the discussion, as he normally would so be a little different, but I think it's such a marvelous topic and it's marvelous way of learning about this material so i'm going to try to proceed in a similar fashion.  Please interrupt make sure that I give you the right way of you know, in an hour so you'll get a 10 minute break and then we'll go on for another hour or so after that and we'll try to work that out Okay, so what i'd like to do and.  inside out.  and taking a view of this case is this particular topic is eugenics and human health and science and what we want to do is take a look at a quote that came out in nature.  This was right after the George floyd incident and nature took a stand, and this is where we're going to be going today.  I know many of you are biologists, and you understand the evolutionary history of humans, but I think it's really important to see where it all came from where it all started.  So, in terms of what we're going to drive home today it's that there is no biological construct of race, it is a social construct and.  So this became a driving force for what we want to do and what we want to educate you about this is what we want you to know.  So, remember, this is the editorial page of nature on June 11 2020 right after George floyd.  evolution teaches children that they're all living things have the same common ancestor, we know that.  And that they and their fellow humans are much more similar than they are different, we know that.  The genetic variation within the groups that we designate as races is much larger than between those groups now let me give you an example, what that paints and this is this 85% figure.  Look around the room and say which of those individuals, you are most likely to share the greatest amount of your genes.  chances are you will be wrong.  You share within any one group 85% of the genes and 15% of shared with other individuals outside.  So, if you look at somebody else you think Oh well, we share this ancestry it's not gonna be the case that you will have a greater portion of jade's.  So that if you look at somebody you say that's a racial different sets of racial differences just not true, so what we want to see is that.  That, if we are able to teach that that genetic variation within the groups that we designated races is much larger than between groups.  Imagine a world that which every student learns this, it would be such a wonderful place and and, one day, maybe, but not for going in the other direction, I think.  Okay, so what I like to do is on this slide what i'm going to talk about is how what happens where you present the science and it's rejected.  And this is going to be time and again of things that you're going to have to realize that's going to be going on in your world.  And I have an example here about climate change, now I could give you a whole lecture on why we know that it is humans that are causing climate change.  But what you can do, and this is what you'll do with race science as well, you attack the science.  Can you can do it where it's only maybe 3% of the population of the scientist is great and 97 seven 7% agree on one particular aspect.  What you can then do is fool the public you divide the public and that's going to be enough to stop the progress we need to see made.  So their strategy is to convince people that the scientists are wrong and we see this with coven you see this with mass bandage.  I mean you have truckers that are going into Canada to destroy the Khan academy why why their strategy is simply to raise the spectra that there is enough doubt.  And you can see, this with the books that are written by people who, you should necessarily is Robert Kennedy jr is telling you not to get vaccinated and it just doesn't make sense Oh, by the way, forgive my political views on these things.  All right.  You should just move into the next issue until this gets sorted out that's what that.  It gives credibility to cranks to the Craig point of view alright, so this is the world we live in and it's going to be your world you get inherited.  it's going to be a professor us words little baby that's going to be born they're going to inherit it and they're going to make the world a better place.  Okay, so i'm going to take the stand up doing what is always is usually done here i'm going to talk just for a second but not yet that day, yet who do you think.  Is the most well known scientists in the world today.  Was laughing loudly, please.  currently living not that previously with Ben.  i'm sorry to hear that.  Oh well, yeah but he's gonna he's a he's a.  TV personality, I mean that that what is one of the most influential findings that we've had in the last hundred years.  How about DNA.  Who is alive today James Watson.  Now watch this did you guys know what James watson's thought is about race.  Scientists James Watson Watson flies home after employers player suspended the Nobel laureates provoke provoke an international robot apparently claiming that black people are less intelligent than whites left brilliant in disgrace yesterday.  This is a guy who is more influential in our world today scientifically, then the guy that discovered DNA.  And he's a racist.  Now we will talk a little bit about that, today, hopefully, again, I have an approach that i'm not going to speed through things so we're going to go slow all right now, having said that.  You got to look more currently here is July of 2020 he used to run cold spring harbor laboratory on long island.  Great research and he was the director and now he was asked get the heck out.  But here's a man that is going to influence tons of people and it's remarkably difficult to combat something like that, as a scientist and you have to do it.  Now I know that what we do is try to look away from the politics and I don't want to get into it, I just wanted to show you this one case that I pulled out.  Boris Johnson had a guy That was a person on staff and he said eugenics are about selecting for good things intelligence is largely inherited.  And a correlates with better outcomes, this is from February of 2020, this is a guy in the Government in Britain and he's going to be asked to get back out, he was eventually then basically asked to resign.  All right now.  There is something you do, that I love there's a few things that I, like you, guys do that I love in this cluster.  Your annotated papers is spectacular i've never seen anybody do anything like that, so what we have here is your person that we look at as a hero, is that what the term was that you guys use.  Somebody a hero right I wasn't Professor as one call that.  I think was a hero all right anybody ever hero Jane Elliott.  Alright, this is the person that she decided today we should talk about turns out, of course, I have a little way of doing this that may be a little bit longer than what she does and i'm going to introduce you to miss Jane Elliott.  All right now I should give you a little bit of a background here that's pretty straightforward i'm going to show you.  A little bit of a film that introduced us to a woman who is a character, but an unbeliever unbelievable and it's even it's even more amazing because this was in the 1960s, right after Martin Luther King, was assassinated.  And I could show you interviews with her last year, you know, on YouTube so just watch what she has done.  and will give you a feeling for who she is.

**no speaker (00:18:12.690):** But seven years ago, civil rights. was assassinated. Frustration nervous systems.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:18:25.860):**  As far away, and I was one third grade teacher who she had to do something that should be a Margarita king, but not just be talked about unexplained weight is really explained this little race.  I knew it was time to deal with this in a concrete way not just talk about it because we didn't talk about racism, since the first day of school.  People.  I watched wonderful children into.  This.  one.  liners over students or wherever.  Class device okay that must stop for a SEC, so what she did when she took half the class.  And she said, these are brown eyed students, these are blue eyed students Grad students are better than blue eyed students.  Next couple days, she introduced this incredible Regiment of Grad students doing things better, and it was so frustrating for the blue eyed students so she started that.  And then, for the next 20 or 30 years she began to be hired to do that for various companies, let me show you where this goes to on this, this is incredible in my mind.  So what she's done what she's done here she's been hired by a prison staff and she wants she's asked to run a exercise divided the group basically whether the wearing I think green or you'll see.  spaces available.  July so.  When I get put in blue I screwed that the color on.  That I was going into the correct.  stay in this area, the workshop was supposed to begin at night, they took the rise in about nine and laughter standing no but I literally stood because there weren't enough chairs and I want to take a chair that somebody can take the generational I did.  Well, David stokes very the other people waited inside them in a room kidding me prepare the ground I people for what was going to happen.  Now this is not something I can do this exercise, what was out there for operations like people are just.  Like people are allowed to sit in these empty chairs and not let it sit next to you know any.  Any size which.  Everybody knows that.  You don't know what you didn't catch all the light person.  Saying that waiting.  For action weekend everyone.  To.  Keep it down.

**no speaker (00:22:05.610):** To.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:22:07.050):**  Virginia, so you know by the people, a little workshop.  was pretty well.  It would be to your advantage.  would also be here advantages, whichever way.  You want a day, while his day, but the general way.  i'm sure that you are unable to find a place for them now i'd like you to notice worship, where.  You have this travels why people use them, give them something decent and they just record, it also notice that people spend a lot of time anyway, look at me see how many funny academic a job with this, this is i'm going to buy this and other thing that this is about black people, so the.  first thing you have to do when you get when you're teaching it to say again situation you're working inside of each situation is.  Each listening skills listening skills are number one number two is quiet hands a mouse.  Everyone needs to write these down.  I like the look at the man.  In black jacket.  The game of what is playing cool.  This is a favorite like a like a cool, though I mean, and I can handle this I don't have this anymore, this whole thing number two producers, keeping our eyes on person who was speaking.  At a pencil.  Or you.  were actually we're on.  Sir, I realized that you feel that you don't need to write it down, but whether or not you write it down, perhaps you can remember all the listeners fyi hands, being the mouse do what that means.  Sure, I believe that you want me to explain it to.  People.  For the last 10 minutes.  Very self centered.  strict control as much of their surrounding this possible people apply.  What.  We have in here because we are required.  Number three but listeners listening, from the beginning to the very end.  Okay, good listeners nice I did learn something.  And this is the thing you're most.  People they decide not to learn some some.  Some of you that have workplace maybe they have an example that they like.  They are.  Brown.  And Brown.  Energy on.  The ground.  in place and sportsman's pretty good.  It just seems like a bird here, so if I have today.  We are very Now this is where you know what you.  choose.  This gets very contentious so you can watch the rest of it on your own.  it's a frontline show and.  They get into this big role and then after the exercise they get together and they talk about what happened.  And it's something that I hope, Professor Crawford when she comes in, is going to talk about how we can change people's views and understand what prejudices, I mean one day, maybe that will be happening okay let's get back to the PowerPoint so that's our hero of the day.  that's dedication of the day.  And now we move on to other aspects of this now, I have this is not in the one that would propose it, because, again I don't want to mess around with a professor osborne's.  slide deck is what they're calling it, but this will be made available to you Okay, so what we're going to do today is take a look at a couple aspects of where.  In this case, eugenics model re science now there is a man named Dick Richard lewington, who was a professor over to Harvard.  And he was back and forth here many times because we had graduate students, that would be that he would serve on the committee.  Quite a character, he passed away at age 92 a couple of months ago, and he started this idea with 85% he was the first one to look at that we will, we will talk a little bit about him.  Professor as well, so that's Charles Murray, I would love for you to look at an article I hope I can get the opportunity to talk about a man named Charles Murray.  He wrote a book in 1994 with the current Stein a call the bell curve and it's something we should explore and we should explore why people listen to them, even today.  Stephen Jay gould actually is, it was a critic of things that was written in mary's book and is important, but today we're going to be looking a little bit more at the genome and the changing way.  human diversity has evolved, so it turns out that post World War Two then would change it before Wer were to was incredibly.  Racist activities afterwards, a little bit less and now we're back in that dissipated and that's unfortunate.  Okay, now, the first thing that I want to talk about his skin color and where does that come from, can I please ask the question does anybody know why we have differences in skin color.  Is that something that's on your radar.  Yes, good Matthew.  differences and melanin but why.  Why are people with darker skin at the tropics people with lighter skin more towards the northern latitude all right now the woman, I feel is we have three women few today for all.  Really heroes, the second one that i'm going to be talking about his name Nina to blocky.  Now it sounds like something that scientists should have known for a long time, but it was Nina john Lansky who actually put together why people have differences in.  The color of the skin now i'm going to not only introduce her to you it's going to be as if she's talking to us in a live presentation and you'll see her in a few minutes, but let me start by just sort of going to some of that material.  And sort of just talk about what she's going to be looking at, so you can think about it, so you have all this differences in skin color and skin tone around the world.  turns out that it turns turns out that there's a reason for it, and she was the one that actually figure this out, maybe some of this just random, it can be just genetic drift.  However, if you look at some of these things it's probably due to some selection pressure.  Something that made skin color different and beneficial in some areas, and not as beneficial and others.  Now, when you look at this, this is from around the world and it takes a look at the amount of sunlight coming into different areas now turns out that if you're up higher elevation.  you're going to be exposed to more UV light if you're further north in the polls less UV light and what you're looking at here is sunshine and skin color.  This is a cubicle map, we seem to understand that, but we don't really think or understand why all right now i'm going to them, rather than me tell you about it i'm going to have Nina Lansky tell you that it.  let's do this first let's get it set up.  i'm not as used to working with the MAC so let me just do this.  And once again there's a lot here that I hope to be able to get to.  All right now there are a few things and not only that it's a little long i'll stop it periodically to make sure, everything is clear.  But at the end of this she talks about linnaeus she talks about where all this material has come from let's see what that says, can I connect to the site.  Why not.  Okay let's see.  Sorry.  Try that again.  Why would that be.  hope.  Well, let me see Let me try this first and then come back the title of this has to do with human health let's see if this works.  This is the second woman third women today Sarah tish cloth and I want to introduce to you because she is the other influential person and where this all came from so we'll do that and i'll have to see if I can work out a way to get that to work okay.  Share screen.  All right, when they're gonna start with her work and then we're going to come back to it later on.  feel much better job of characterizing genetic variation in ethnically diverse populations.  We want to understand the evolutionary processes that generate an observation.  And to better understand how GG GG protein ag department and our.

**no speaker (00:35:10.320):** Normal variation as well as the six months.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:35:14.430):**  So both of my research.

**no speaker (00:35:17.670):** There are reasons for that.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:35:21.630):**  One is, which is the fact that all originated in Africa, so these red dots represent the locations of fossils of anatomically modern payments, the old is a which is dated to about 300,000 years ago.  So, after this origin in Africa, the past few hundred thousand years relatively small numbers of people migrated out of Africa.  expanded migrated across the globe, good for us to have populations around the world.  When I say a small number of people have escalated group as follows in hundreds or locales so you can imagine that this demographic can really shape the pattern of diversity that we see, and for this reason we see higher levels of diversity in Africa, relative to other parts of.  Now, when the partner team it's about love to Africa They ran into our case population replace the other calls that Dennis up into we now know that they interbred.  somewhere between around two to 6% of the genome sort of people from outside of Africa can be traced back to these archaic populations is almost certainly happening in Africa as well it's just that it's really hard to detect because we don't have any good records are kept birds genomes.  The other thing that motivates my research is to better understand risk factors for health disparities so, for example, hypertension, is more common in people of African ancestry compared to other ethnic groups of the US.  And type two diabetes is more common in people native American ancestry compared to other person is now we know, undoubtedly, that there are major.  Environmental social demographic dietary those factors that are contributing to these health disparities, but it's all that there may be underlying genetic risk factors as well.  And yeah this was a prescriptive way through it 2018 in January of that year we looked at just want to stop it, for, say.  Now what you're looking at here is we're going to be talking about genome wide association studies.  This is taking a look at populations and saying that i'm going to come up with a poly gene IQ score and i'm going to tell you the risk of.  This disease is caused by this particular Jane Eyre this particular subset of jane's by 8% or 10% now what you're looking at here is something that's very scary.  If you look at where the data is collected that you looking at 78.39% of all the studies that we use to determine the effect of genes on disease are in Europe.  Well there's a problem here, the problem is going to be, what does that mean in a population which is geographically different and has different selective pressures and those geez that we've identified to cause diabetes aren't going to be in that population.  This is a problem, she is addressing so let's take a look.  At about 80% of the individuals included you boss at that time or European ancestry.  10% for Asian ancestry around 2% African ancestry 1% Hispanic and she left us with 1% everyone else, and if you look at other commonly use databases, I know my attitude attached to it, yes, very major hurricane fives.  Some problems problem for a number of reasons, one is that it's our ability to fully understand the genetic risk factors for you to disease and actually exasperate healthy follies.  her ability to cancer genetic research and clinical practice or health policy to be a leader even worse if you could say get.  A good result in an effort assessment of pathogenic variance in clinical studies and one of the reasons for that is that one of the criteria for determining the various pathogenic is how common is it.  With the idea being that if it's very common that it's probably not happened yet, but maybe the spirit that's identified it's not common Europeans but it's common another population, so that could actually change the assessment.  And then, lastly, attempts to get assessment of genetic risk for European based studies and non Europeans result in it in an accurate assessment of risk and like an appropriate interventions i'm going to tell you a bit more about that.  So i'm sure many of you now are familiar with apologetic resource, but for those of you who are not.  When someone goes into genome wide association study let's use as an example, looking at heart disease, these have been predominantly Europeans.  10s of thousands, if not hundreds of hundreds of thousands of people, and you can basically look at all the variants associated risk for heart disease.  If you were to look at a patient one say you don't know what the risks that you look at the same genetic markers and you basically are going to add a defect.  Of all these different variants on risk for disease so again i've heard sample have a lot of the kids for high risk for heart disease, that would be my overall risk much higher than the general population, and you can imagine that this could be very important as a clinical tool.  And in fact it is actually be put into the clinic already but let's see if somebody wishes to make the interpretation of what's going on here.  So remember what we're talking about a poly gene explore is a score that says these genes are going to be causative agents to this particular disease so prediction accuracy relative the Europeans.  Then you have Europeans obviously it's 100%.  How does that work for the rest of this particular worldwide distribution.  What to tell you okay.  Not very accurate personally, you know, like she said because you're using Europeans as a reference of course it's going to be accurate for people that have the most.  background data, but you know if there's something that's not.  You know if I variant that's not listed in there, like you know, as somebody, and this is a problem you got it exactly Thank you, and so what you're looking at if you're African or East Asian those polly gene IQ scores really don't mean anything.  So this is an initially then again this idea of race and then assume it's a problem.  But another studies have shown you this is a party polly's that was based on a simulation, but there are comparable data additional.  know how you calculate apologetic for sports therapy and then you try to apply these patients from other ethnic groups, they try to predict the same phenotype or vertices it does, really, for me it does, particularly for me in East Asian African population.  So why is that.  There are several possible so want to be that actually exactly the same causal they're already sex and causal genes are genes, but when we do it, you want we're looking for variants that are associated or tag the causal variant very rarely actually that was helpful there.  And it just could be that the tag very Europeans is different than Asians and Africans, now we already, we should be able to address that you just fine federal tax rates overpopulation.  But, alternatively, there could be different calls over so maybe a different genetic architecture population different demographic history or annotation different acquire.  And if that's The case of their different covariance you're never going to hire unless you look in ethnically diverse populations so i'm just discussing these first two.  causes of black river occasion apologetic verse chorus and then also there could be other things like 30 different effect sizes different populations do the differences in the low frequency gene by gene or to fight for it.  So, because of his maker bias toward your hands okay now this part of it, I could skip over what she's talking here is a little bit about how she could that's her research.  And what we have is a different languages throughout Africa and then she makes the point of how difficult it is to do the work because there's no electricity, if you watch the entire.  Video of this talk that you gave and a good talk was given, I think, less than a year ago.  That What happened was that they would have to once you decided to do this, she decided to do something that no one ever tried before.  And when she was trying to figure out what to do, no one had done it.  They would they be in the lab and they would practice on taking the blood and what they were going to do and how they were going to work it.  And you know, eventually, they started to regenerate is this was interesting to listen to her during the question period so i'm going to just get by that a little bit and then go to the next phase.  that this has been a team effort we work closely with collaborators throughout Africa is just showing several collaborators.  And I thought it also show a bit of what it's like to do the research for big city minority populations in Africa.  That are living more traditional lifestyle, so if you take a little bit more remote areas and that requires sprint cars four wheel drive vehicle empty oliver's pipes with us so here you go outside perspective inside prospectus.  And this is in Tanzania individuals on the upper right over lunch or hot summer gathers speak of clicks and Upper left hand side, and I will say area hospitals and hearing a tip top, this is the hub reduce some of her.  Insurance and this is from Cameron is never right college or university school of folks and I love.

**no speaker (00:46:39.960):** This research.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:46:42.510):**  And one of the things that were really, really careful about is making sure that this research is done in an ethical manner.  And what that means is that we don't just get IRB approval letter universities, we have to go through a very long.  ethical review process in each country, we get research comments you spend a lot of time going to the different villages explaining what we're doing.  What is translating into the local language in layman's terms and it talks about the risks and the benefits of any sort and Africa exactly that ultimately have to get individual.  We also think it's really important to return results, the participants know how to read science, but we were able to summarize and put those in terms that they understand.  And and translated, we can also even show with some of the figures i'm going to show you today and I tell you that people really, really appreciate that so it's a way better chance.  and training, capacity building is really important, and I have the honor of attending a number of students and postdocs show here, because the ultimate goal is that they should bring this experience right Africa should be able to lead research on.  Some of these regions, we have templates for like a DNA and RNA we bring with me to do to get first plasma.  We also get fecal samples, so the microbiome you get very detailed information about graphic information, information is a medical history, they might have.  And then have to process the samples of regions without electricity, so what we started doing the overland sort of out of the frank here, but we started bringing a purple generator, and so we just set up a lab.  In.  Diversity and not going anywhere, we did a non invasive manner, so this includes repeated answer Professor measurements cardiovascular blocking blood phenotypes they all function and infectious disease status or we can.  Say that we're using our color integrative integrative approach we're at this point we're starting to do high coverage whole genome sequencing.  we're generating reduce proteomics for flood you haven't yet done a lot of epigenetics look at appalachian patents were quite agree that the future.  We look at gene expression will, for one, and also for sickle cells before and after me challenges, so we try to integrate that with genetic data variants that are.  correlated are influencing gene expression we've looked at the gut microbiome we've looked at the blood metabolism.  And then we look at how these are interactive each other and how they're influenced by environmental factors like diet pathogen exposure and how those influences the tricks that we're looking at, as long as it takes for us.  So the populations that we say well they're very static from each other in different regions, they are different departments, because they're very rural areas, they tend to have a pretty homogeneous apartment.  So we tend to eat the same foods they have the same sort of cultural practices.  So one thing i've ever able to do that is compare people let's say in our world versus urban environments, who share the same genetic ancestry and.  Try to distinguish the goal of genetics and environment variable traits for the opposite.  We could look at groups to have very different genetic ancestry says show by these different colors here.  But live in the State Department or someone or environment to have been attacked so, for example, lonnie pastoralists.  known to have relative resistance, people are going to read things that we don't get your favorite fruits and the song, so I have susceptibility to TV tuberculosis religious reasons we don't understand.  So i'm going to tell you about our study that was done a while ago back in 2009 or meet one of the largest studies of genetic variation ethnically diverse Africans we look at our 3000 applicants from.  Russia here mainly basis where we were at work, but a lot of gap so there's still a lot of diversity in Africa that's on purpose.  computational approaches did.  just want to stop for a second and have you take a look at this figure.  know what you've got different colors that reflect different genetic genomic information.  So if you're looking at this, for instance in the lower left these are non Africans compare them to in the one right above that East and Africa middle Africa.  And you look in there for at a tremendous difference in the genome of each of these populations, what has happened in Africa is remarkably different than what you would imagine.  And what what i'm suggesting is that populations in Africa, this is where you humans evolved they became isolated.  And so, even within Africa, you have these tremendous variations, whereas them what happened in the rest of the world was that people left.  And she mentioned that it was maybe hundreds or thousands of people that left somewhere between 80 and 100,000 years ago they left Africa they made their way into Europe.  They made the way across Asia into Asia, all the way down and the people that left with a small subset of that tremendous diversity within Africa.  So, Africa has an incredible amount of diversity and we are doing people a disservice if we only think of that small population from Europe that we are studying to understand the genetic effects on disease so let's hear her say what she wants.  To find ancestral genetically differentiating ancestor populations and also represented by the different colors and this planet is a.  Number line to each line as an individual, and we can infer be ancestry for each individual so Karen Lu are people to self identify as European or Middle Eastern.  Caribbean people from India or Pakistan or Central Asia East Asia China to the Americas and, if we look at Africa, if you just see by all the colors how much genetic diversity, there is a must populations in Africa click here, and it will be seen on the entire globe.  And this is a graduate of better demonstrated we just focus on Africa and we totally individuals by language or geographic region.  we're showing a portion of different ancestors, and you see my all the colors how much variation areas and roots in eastern Africa southern second restaurant Morgan are genetically differentiated and we can also see because look at the faces here.  morphological differences physiological differences in this is due to the demographic history of Africa and adaptation to various different diets.  On the seo stuff I might show up there, it is now Professor okay i'm gonna hold off on this and get that.  will come will come back to this later.  Because I want to be more getting to the more complicated gws thoughts of studies, I want to go back to that studying and have you understand the.  evolution skin color.  Okay, so let's just do this.  Alright, so we're gonna we're going oh.  I do think this is a little bit tangential, but I have this up here, I put it in last night.  I thought you get a kick out of the political environment that we live in, has anybody heard of a commentator and a joy read.  A she's on msnbc but he has a really good take on what we do what we call somebody black or white just watch this let's see if I can.  gonna have the shops shops stop sharing for a second.

**no speaker (00:56:01.680):** See.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:56:03.990):**  No okay hold on.  have too many films.  I want to get that on the.  On.  I mean that's it, but I want to share the screen so it's recorded.  And then i'll give you a break, right after this.  miracle, so it always, it is a lie.  Is the problem, so you would love to have a word with either that and I, or whoever broker is so you gotta check.  The way the mega right is currently in this country saying war over history and anti racism education when they say call it critical race theory.  it's basically a freak out over why Americans, you have any more woke on matters of race.  And you think based on it freaked out that critical race theory or authors of wolf is self help books like Robin d'angelo or anti racism offer Internet can be invented race, the right wingers tell it, so the truth is in the race.  or with your precious founding fathers because actual critical race theory will tell you race is not a biological reality it's a cultural constructs and what it was literally an idea or right here a little USA.  cover most of semi modern human history or even use the term white to destroy anything other than wealthy women who didn't work in the fields are alive.  Until the 17th century when the Europeans and colonic this country started using white to distinguish themselves from the so called savages the indigenous people initially tried to enslave but most a lot of germs.  And from those apropos of African descent, who they decided, by definition, because they had colored blood or equal and therefore his label and not just that.  but also their children and their children's children forever to be owned by the claim owner and to be treated sold around like cattle, which is why American slavery was called chattel slavery.  And that was true children look like this that the fugitive slave back in 1850 today anyway, first, the right to kidnap and reinflate any black person who escaped from bondage and even collect a bounty.  badminton or let me towards the end of the day, how much color boulud a person in the room for one eighth African American.  room for one for that mulato when he says very much in American supposedly a white American invention.  and turn what homework Lucy all right dapper 19th century New Orleans shoemaker or in 1850 to 83 colors versus his district are under a look now you got to look up Homer plessey somebody googling just please you find something interesting.  Yes, Melissa.

**Melisa Osborne (01:00:06.420):**  I was just gonna say i'd ask me everyone if they remember the name from their history class.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:00:12.300):**  Ah, well Okay, but there's something even more relevant.

**no speaker (01:00:16.410):** Okay.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:00:18.630):**  let's see what they come up with.  Okay hold on.

**Melisa Osborne (01:00:25.980):**  He sort of.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:00:26.730):**  Was pre i'm not going to listen to this is one eighth supposedly black.  But about three weeks ago, he was pardoned by the government, for his crime that he committed.  Does that come up.  curious.  does not.  It does no bottom.  On the bottom of the page okay.  He was just popped in for something he did over 100 years ago got it yeah you know it's only section of a train.  And excited a white section of retrain was arrested and literally only three weeks ago, he was pardoned for that crime interesting let's see what she says, and then we'll move on la.  shoemaker.  Back to this is part of a group in New Orleans or determined to overturn the laws they didn't say remeeting white not like the Western Union troops pulled out of the South, and he said he said.  look like, but this is a pretty good guests, because how about classy who descended from a white Haitian plantation owners who fled to New Orleans African slaves were building over there, slavery there well, the only way.  To do a short.  Okay i'm going to give you a break 10 please take 10 minutes and i'm going to try to get that other site to work, but what my intent is for the rest of the class now what are these the usually and about 215.  Something like that Okay, so what i'll try to get through the point of where and why we have differences and skin color.  If I can't get the boss to do it, you know jabberwocky to do it, I mean then i'll do it okay so go take a photo Coco take your 10 minute break see why that has happened okay.  hi guys, I want to work on this so i'm going to try going okay.  yeah make.  It was Salem State University it's possible and I didn't use this computer to get this all set up yesterday because it's not my and i've been working on a different one at home, so let me see if I can get that to work it's a great tool for a job landscape.  This is the talk.  hi this happened yesterday to it takes a while to upload I guess.  Did you do that, Melissa.  No.

**Melisa Osborne (01:05:34.380):**  Yes, recording change.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:05:38.070):**  Oh you're recording again okay.

**Melisa Osborne (01:05:40.320):**  yeah cool.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:05:41.940):**  yeah yeah no no that's great I just wish this would work.  it's still I think it's still loading, I think there is an issue with how that flows up well let's see because also we start speaking out talking but that's okay.  we'll give it two more minutes and then i'll start.  Okay.  Welcome everybody.  My name is Ruth other colleges arts and sciences and it is my great honor to welcome you to.  birthday is.  In it at Salem State University faculty Center at least this day.  Twice next to your.  own and because, where is it the thing here web browser.  Okay.  And then Oh, I see I see.  To the last.  it's going to pop up again I get rid of this one.

**no speaker (01:07:21.690):** here.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:07:26.070):**  This is so much more exciting for me to hear I do this to me do this, you have to share your screen yeah okay hold on let's do that I want to forget to do that all right, thank you.  tell you.  This one right yeah okay.  We are in business kids.  Okay that's how I can do this, I can tell you what it is, but I think it's so much needed to hear this person do it.  And the way it worked out, was it was little bits and pieces of information that she started to get so why do people have darker skin.  you're right Matthews right it's Melanie but it's not just that melanin is going to be a UV light is a problem.  it's a particular problem because it prevents the synthesis of vitamin D.  So this is going to go hand in hand what we're going to do we're going to talk about the out of Africa hypothesis, and we will be going back to tissue.  Who actually is involved in looking at some of the genes for skin color we will talk about that in more detail, but what happened was that she knew vitamin D was an issue and that's why people skip became writer, but she did not know why darker skin would be favored anywhere.  And it turned out She then it can, and the reason she got this thing with the skin color was a husband is, I guess, he is a.  A person who studies distributions and is it is good, with computers and they found this distribution that people with a lighter.  In areas where there's more UV a darker skin that data were available so she had that and then years later, she attended a conference and they were talking about falling.  And folic acid now folic acid is broken down by UV so you've got to prevent that and melanin works so, on the one hand, the northern latitude.  you're going to actually have to have the UV and you're going to have to prevent UV because it's going to be prevented synthesis of vitamin D.  At the tropics you're going to prevent the UV for breaking that folic acid to combine those two is where we stand today and the understanding of the evolution of skin color let's hear this in a wonderful presentation by doctors of landscape.  Well, good day.  To hear the introduction.  Unfortunately.  Listen to it.  Every day.  Is my great honor to.  it's the connection.  2021 47.  festival is.  It all the.  event is held to celebrate Charles Darwin.

**no speaker (01:11:33.780):** In.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:11:35.940):**  The faculty, by the way, last week was the 2020.  I had a presentation by tissue but not as good as the one I was shown.  In the ground if you go through the years to other departments in a club and CDC or support or the Charles our trust.  Welcome scientists scientists who shared interest in learning about the world around some well known speakers REP in.  England marvelous even day, who will inspire ios BF Skinner in good shape destiny with you, with a list of speakers titles available on the eighth graders the plan any corporation interdisciplinary brought education.  A wide range sorry about this if you're it's no different I hope you had a chance to look at the schedule their as their lives, presented by the speakers and expertise in the viral.  We will go back to tish coursework she is one that's identified many of the genes associated with different senses.  and  And it confirms this out of high pass out of Africa hypothesis there's one gene that's very much responsible for light of skin and it was there's there's a problem with this, I think i'll have to I will have to say bye bye and do it myself okay.  stop me.  If you miss if I did it.  To the members of it.  Is this requires a lot.  It starts, right after the last festival.  So again, thanks.  To the Center of the city.  I hope you all had an opportunity to learn from the amazing speakers and films which one this one.  is more information about this.  So.  Okay i'm gonna make a quiet and then i'm going to talk and then we'll come back to it.  See you soon.  Okay i'm gonna do it, and then we'll get back to her.  That should be it I hope.

**no speaker (01:14:41.790):** Okay.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:14:46.530):**  Alright, so I want to talk about skin color and how that all plays out and it turns out that it's pretty well established now from our work.  And we have this situation with, we know that there is differences, we know that the differences correspond to this, and this is again the type of data set that he was working with and it turns out.

**Melisa Osborne (01:15:13.500):**  that the biggest i'm proud your PowerPoint is not correct.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:15:17.790):**  It is not.  Thank you very much.

**no speaker (01:15:20.370):** yep.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:15:34.140):**  that's good okay thanks didn't catch that Melissa Thank you alright, so it turns out ups that.  That when you were looking at light escape is strong selection pressure to have lighter skin where there's not enough fighter level of you be the leader, you need a break it down.  The vitamin D, so you can synthesize it so as humans moved out of the tropical homeland, they receive reduce UV radiation from the sun.  The bride body requires you mean radiation to synthesize vitamin D and essential nutrients in the tropics UV radiation is strong enough to penetrate dark skin so they're fine.  So this was always the exploration and this was the way we understood it, and then what happened was it began to be the problem, the problem is well why don't you have lighter skin at the tropics now.  In a previous talk, I heard her give what What would you what would you a bit explanation being why you need melanin at the tropics what would be most logical than the one that we always would go with.  Good.  yeah and what's the sun doing to you.  And what's it doing to you it's giving you a melanoma and she used a she explained, something that I didn't agree with, and I still don't agree with.  And she said well people get melanoma when they're older beyond reproductive age and I don't, what do you think of that as an xml I don't buy it.  So, but that was the explanation, she gave so it's certainly true that UV that Melanie might be very well protected against melanoma so that's part of it.  But the other part, was this other thing with folio so basically what we're looking at is that the the skin color of these.  People varies tremendously and there's a reason for it alright so take a look at this, this is UV light intensity and that goes up and up and up and skin color basically becomes darker and darker boy up.  This is universal, this is something we all know about now, if you want to take a look at the vitamins this folate that comes into play.  And that's not something that we normally would think of it may not be the only explanation, but UV causes body stores a full late to become depleted.  that's not a good thing, so low levels of pregnant women cause birth defects local and levels of men causes infertility.  dark skin is protective against full length depletion and areas of I UV radiation, so that, in addition to the vitamin D inflammation where vitamin D UV light is required for vitamin D sentences in the skin.  vitamin D is crucial for both development pelvic bones are vitamin D deficient women can be too fragile for birth.  and areas of low UV radiation fair skin allows enough UV light to be absorbed in the skin to prevent vitamin D deficiency.  away, do you know that one of the things that you should be taking to help you against coven 19.  Is vitamin D yes anybody is anybody know that I mean like they say that really is very helpful and you should we're all probably deficient in vitamin D, so if you go, I mean I.  Just as an aside, I give you my own, I went in I found that my vitamin D was like 19 and you have to get between 40 and something else, so they started first time ever, I started taking vitamin D, but then you also read that the vitamin D is helpful against.  it's helpful against actually a bad effect of of coded.  check your ID to me, is not a home phone and home test for that so vitamin D is really important for a lot of different things, including covered.  So what you have here is a nice little depiction of what's going on, so if you have light skin vs dark skin and the left, and you have low UV light the light escape individuals that have higher reproductive success.  The right I UV light is going to basically being that the darker skinned individual is going to have more babies at a higher reproductive success it's just very confident very logical.  All right now, this work is the work that I think is most interesting to us as biologists, so the gene that is very common and Europeans that causes or is associated with lighter skin.  Is a variant called SLC 24 a five alright, so what happened is that, as people left Europe.  After approximately 4000 5000 years this particular gene became more prevalent now, you know how they find this this isn't This is also, I think something that's rather interesting.  Now, a lot of this was determined by looking at the gene and the surrounding part of that chain.  If it becomes smaller and smaller if it's all the same, that means it's a recent evolutionary bad, but if you're looking for a gene let's say you're selecting from gene SLC 24 a five.  Well, if you selected for that gene and it's a new as a new new chain it's got a wider band around it that's inherited with it and the selection would show that.  But as selection proceeds and that becomes more fixing the population, the surrounding part of the genome becomes more diversified and that's called the selective sweep.  now open to maybe, six, seven years ago, we only had data that was analyzed as a selective sweep to tell you, when it happened.  And that would be that you know they come over 4000 years 5000 years ago so very recently only last year they found a population of people in Northern Europe.  They need to about 7000 years ago and they wanted to know if they had this particular gene Now let me get this straight.  Let me have make you understand, have you understand this people did not look at archaic human genomes until recently.  it's like this, I remember in the late 1990s in the class of animal behavior talking about an MRI in the brain and how that would tell us about the evolution of human brains.  1997 it wasn't that long ago where we could do that, and now you can so it was only about four or five years ago, that they were able to actually took them take a look at okay Human Genome and then look at that and these warriors didn't have it.  So the explanation was the data and have it that meant that it wasn't there yet in northern Europe.  So instead of 7000 years ago the interpretation is maybe 4000 years ago and if you're writing a paper and you choosing that as your topic.  Let me know i'll give you the references, the new stuff OK, so now, in addition to that, shame and this I know the listener knows this stuff much better than I do.  There were two other genes he artsy to an octa two that are associated with light skin all right now, in addition to that, there is this third, fourth gene this one's really weird m F St 12 and that has a it is this very there that will make the skin lighter.  And what this meant, is that you can see that there are a number of genes that have changed over time let's see if I can go back to my friend.  over here whoops let me.  see if we can get that.  This one.  yeah come on.

**no speaker (01:24:12.330):** His arms is laser.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:24:16.950):**  History at one time it was thought that homo erectus left Africa 1.6 million years ago and that was isolated, for a long period of time and that's why we have different populations with different skin color.  not true, the out of Africa hypothesis says we came out 100,000 years ago less or more something about that size so.

**no speaker (01:24:44.460):** we've done it as we're trying to understand the skin color is understand how this process. To first loss of most of our body which occurred as a result of the need to have for fun for a stand, they help us. beat the heat the regenerate all of this right, that chasing basically if you have a fur coat on it's hard to keep cool and so one of the chief. We see an evolution, the beginning of the changes, how long is the last post body painter. and increase the density of at crying sweat glands and produce a lot of sweat that always keep cool we'll come back to this Eric timeline or human evolution, but what's critical to see is that lie about one and a half to two years ago lead him to get falsely careless. skin color changes in order to help protect his son. One reconstruct the appearance of this early James Hello. She have mostly it's been probably some hair on our heads and that mostly they get scared. When we lost her hair, we lost a lot of our sun protection and the way that we compensate was through evolution. In. The sun is feels good it's very nice Equator it's very, very intensive in the tire tropics it's very tense now only visible light. ultraviolet radiation which is potentially very damaged and so all organisms have different types of cells in some way from these harsh effects of. ultraviolet radiation that other very high energy forms of radiation coming from the sun ultraviolet radiation is really a focus of today's topic, because that is really bioactive activity that we're going to carry the specific effects on the skin. And what we imagine that. The Equator just like our our distant ancestors, were we can think about the simulation the movie coming from the sun, for their a shortwave like. sort by the atmosphere surrounding the earth and then he which we hear a lot about stays up also folly to the earth service penetrating. The quake penetrate the atmosphere, a player and very strongly that the strongest entity is really a wish travels basically through the atmosphere with visible light. takeaway here is that at the equator even ground up is strong and so organisms, including our ancestors have to protect themselves from the strong side white. One feet in detail of the distribution of this was strong. it's really telling an outcome at times, because this is really our. skin color skin color is directly related to ultraviolet radiation intensity and really the end of the lecture here, because the rest is just sort of details. The most protective skin coloration the darkest skin occurs in areas where ultraviolet radiation is highest shown here in red hot pink and then we have incrementally lower and seasonal ultraviolet radiation as we get closer to the goals. These maps dated from NASA remotely sense data that have been rendered into that form by my collaborator with constant George Chapel right is such as this and will average that, by way of illustration, today. You to take away the snap is okay it's very, very strong these very small Equator but in areas where there's a lot of kids entity like Amazonia here in South America or equatorial West Africa. The UK levels are lower, similarly, as we get out of the tropics they begin going into the northern hemisphere well. There are other duration very low levels of ultraviolet radiation, this is the roadmap for understanding human pigmentation as humans, we get this first into these different zones for millennia.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:30:18.450):**  Early on this handsome guy with his beautiful dark spam table doing a lot of swimming with sharks in the semi finalists for marketable.

**no speaker (01:30:30.420):** source ultraviolet radiation radiation dark because absorbs all these ways. Different. species.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:30:52.110):**  And they put it into mice and made the skin matter identified.

**no speaker (01:30:58.440):** selected for some. Reason in evolutionary theory for the evolution. has been. checked all later. is a big body is absolutely essential for making a relatively good day basically if you can't make them regulated repair DNA you can't make ourselves repair cells. And you can't make the early embryo CAFE Sir.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:31:38.310):**  We came to this this realization when we realize that phone late, which is to get from the variety of dietary sources like vegetables citrus fruits is actually sensitive ultraviolet radiation, so we got something sensitive ultraviolet radiation and processes that are dependent on it.

**no speaker (01:32:05.010):** That sensitive entity.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:32:09.270):**  For late, as I said, is July, for any.  vegetables citrus fruits whole grains and really super important.  All the women in the audience will certainly.

**no speaker (01:32:26.580):** understand why there's so much.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:32:31.230):**  That they are encouraged to.  Be pregnant because you're listening to.  division.

**Melisa Osborne (01:32:44.970):**  We have for weight.

**no speaker (01:32:48.180):** If you have any processes that interrupt always.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:32:52.650):**  causes to be created or destroyed you're in trouble hands a lot of valid pigmentation that informs a natural sunscreen and how we protect the integrity of the bioactive important footlights in circulation.  So here we are with our here's our timeline again there's the evolution of the genus homo approximately and the evolution at home safe it's in Africa, the kidney around 300,000 years.  Basically, our lineage, although we do have some representatives who.  Africa at various times in practice, for instance, going into Malaysia about a billion billion and a half years ago.  Most of those calculations become extinct well we're concerned with his policy things continues to evolve in Africa and basically our policy, our space, the first scalable evidence or 1000 years ago.  We become modern every respect, with respect to our culture, our capacity for language and symbolic behavior very sophisticated technologies heart he made all these things evolve, when we were in our our early days.

**no speaker (01:34:30.240):** In Africa exclusively in Africa between 380 years ago.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:34:40.830):**  So when we think about the evolution of early African homo sapiens and the population Africa that are being there today, we could easily have this conversation select their forces and the evolution of documentation to protect people from.

**no speaker (01:35:07.320):** Alternative ultraviolet radiation, but we know that there are lots of people with more right. that existed so.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:35:18.720):**  what's going on what happened How did this.  I would burn you philosophy meditation or deep a visitation for curve.  While that's loading up and just generally about the pattern of dispersal movement of people that occurred periods after about 1000 years ago, out of Africa, remember, most people over this time are living.

**no speaker (01:35:53.670):** In Africa.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:35:55.740):**  So we're talking about here are small groups that aren't believing Africa in pursuit of food initially prey animals are various kinds.  We know that that people started moving into the APP for Arabia that sold his house along the coast East Asia company 60 to 70 candles years ago.  These these arrows just the general idea of where is the specials are going to have lunch and watch the arrows relative to the results so here, we got people going into southern and Southeast Asia and I left validation.  From hinterland position between the Caspian the Black Sea have people going North Western Europe and North East squared is working stage and then consider.  Probably around 15,000 years ago into the world now what's important here is that not only are people going on dispersing into these zones of different up especially mentioned these very low up in the northern hemisphere.  Also, we know from genetics and genomics.  These populations of people are small and so these populations have experienced geneticists call population bottlenecks restrictions of genetic variability.  The combination of bottlenecks plus intense natural selection really is the story of skin pigmentation evolution.  it's important to remember, even though humans are dispersing over thousands of years that individual human lifetime speak for our lunch vacations per se, it was that a lot of.  How they spent most of their time outdoors and there really wasn't until about 20 to 30,000 years ago there wasn't much in the way of some clothing or built environment shelters people took shelter.  shelters in case what they spent most of their time outdoors out so closing the point is is this was the primary interface between our bodies and the environment.  And so we adapted to the machines that were outside at a particular time, whether they were intense or now, so this was the primary.  So what was it like for the sun's rays like let's say extreme northern hemisphere during the winter time let's look at the simulation again maybe.  The atmosphere, as it is.

**no speaker (01:39:07.050):** Now I.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:39:09.090):**  will be here because it turns out, although it's monumentally destructive terms of its effects on a biological systems, including the human body in db this one positive important thing, which is to begin the process of making vitamin D his skin.  To be a also comes to the earth's surface with this is just like I did earlier simulation but the key point here is the uvb is missing in the sunlight during the venture outside of the tropics.  So what about these two guys, we need to think about well how is this reacting to sunlight now, if this is the summer justify the intensity of sunlight at their sunglasses.  What we know is that the man on the Right, who has for us melanin national son sweet spirit we felt protected but he'll also made vitamin D in his skin at a slower rate than them had left.  And this is really where the next phase of this evolution pigmentation timeline is toby populations are dispersing into higher latitudes, the only way to stay healthy, year in and year out, is to some of their protective sunscreen.  So what we really have about here is blank steel beam the payment it's a pending lawsuits element and the less validate we have the easier it is a vitamin D in the skin.  So here we are thinking about what's going on as people go into these high latitudes first integration in the Americas.  it's salutary to remember that there are really high latitudes environments in the southern hemisphere, I apologize for not being able to step forward i'm afraid to touch it.  Because I can skip the last 10 minutes.  That what we see as people are dispersing over time, the northern hemisphere it's a combination of why logic I keep genetic and cultural adaptations that allow them to live healthy lives.  And this is really what we want to look at it a bit more detail is these just how this all worked out.  In a variety of excellent genetic studies that have been conducted in the last two years we've been able to look at the genetic architecture, so to speak.  For pigmentation in many populations of the world and there's a great attention focused on Western Europeans Asians, we can spot those White Papers skin.  And it was quite surprising, one of the key evidence 10 years ago that these two populations who have roughly very similar looking at all the same skin.  By in genetically.  This is one of the most remarkable except i'm sorry to stop, I just want you to take a look at the genes on the bottom, in addition to he rtc cl SLC sport five it says other one MC one R is associated with skin color and everything.

**no speaker (01:43:32.640):** Increased the pigmentation.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:43:36.390):**  40,000 years ago the present time, largely on the basis of different interpretations different genetic mutations.  mutations article.  So it can be patients that are favorable under certain environmental conditions and it's convergent evolution here or mutations that I want to talk, I want to get to the point, which talks about.  More in spoken to that so if you're in the urban PV to make tea, out of a little something like this is such a beautiful way to look natural selection.  So really what we can identify years.  or so boss melanin pigmentation for deep sleep, is a good combination of up in.  The productions.  and receive these these that higher latitudes with.  them.  i'm gonna let it run but i'll make it silent and i'll just talk for a couple minutes, so you see what's going on here is that we now understand that skin color is just one of many traits which is other selection.  We use it unfortunately to define race and again and again in this field, you return to the fact that you're looking at differences that relate to geography.  So this is the problem that we have you have geographical areas where we have a different subset of genes and sure that might be a gene that.  is more associated, for instance with malaria resistance, but it doesn't matter what your skin color is so if you're living in a Mediterranean area, this large instances of malaria, then that person could have white skin.  yellow any color skin, so what fortunately what has happened to our society is that we began to define race, on the basis of anything else, like, I always an introductory biology, which many of you may have taken I mentioned lactose intolerance.  And it turns out that lactose intolerance is one of the most well studied.  Gene for that has been on the selection and in areas where this domesticated cattle the gene for lactose intolerance persistence has been effectively selected for and.  How many anybody in this room either yourself or your family member has lactose intolerance my wife my daughter it's not uncommon.  And it turns out that it is the ancestral trade So what if we defined race, on the basis of whether you're lactose intolerant or lactose tolerant.  we unfortunately have to use this concept of skin color to do that, and this is why we've got to again and again emphasize that under the skin, we are all the same.  There is no difference, and we have created what is now the social construct a race so it's it's an enormous problem that we've got to somehow sell and now she which we will probably not get to today because it's already past the time.  i'll let i'll actually get it set up so that will hear her talk about where this all started and Professor as was already discussed the days So yes, I will go to.  Next Thursday this Thursday Professor elaborate office going to do your regular discussion.  You know that's going to be what you guys do with the annotated papers and I will come for that, but on the Thursday after this a lecture again continually more with the.  More the biological stuff that the je je w as studies what they tell us, etc, and then we'll move on, for that, after that, and which will be.  Mobile say so, what will be fine I mean i'm trying to use many of the material that first one gave me I not going to do it, as well as she is but will try my best so guys today is Tuesday, have a good Wednesday will see you Thursday.

**Melisa Osborne (01:48:14.520):**  Thanks.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:48:15.750):**  Okay, so.  guys my my.

**Melisa Osborne (01:48:19.650):**  college time to stop the recording.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:48:22.020):**  You Thank you..  I apologize my computer.

