---
---

# Socio-economic-environmental Factors/"Economic Inheritance" - Generational Wealth

**Date:** 4/14/2022

**Amanda Katchmar (00:07:15.840):**  hi i'm well how about you.

**Felicity Crawford (00:07:18.210):**  Good thanks for coming in.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:07:21.780):**  Today i'm.  Good.  No i'm just saying my i'm currently zooming in from my phone my wi fi just cut out.  So um yeah once I get that straightened out i'll join from my laptop and.

**Felicity Crawford (00:07:35.400):**  I will be great.  painter how are you.

**Athena Tejada (00:07:41.010):**  i'm good, how are you.

**Felicity Crawford (00:07:42.600):**  Good thanks, thank you for coming in.

**Athena Tejada (00:07:45.600):**  i'm excited.

**no speaker (00:07:47.370):** To.

**Felicity Crawford (00:07:49.650):**  Are you able to see my screen Athena.  Yes, wonderful.  i'll switch to present mode shortly when folks more folks come in.  Why don't they just do that no I got them.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:05.190):**  hey felicity.

**Felicity Crawford (00:08:06.450):**  How are you.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:08.610):**  i'm doing great i'm actually I was jumping out of another zoom meeting into this meeting just to make sure that everything is called was it seemed like everything lined up.

**Felicity Crawford (00:08:18.120):**  So far, so good.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:21.540):**  For participants that's the same number is here's play on zoom let's see if people remember it and show it.  again.

**Felicity Crawford (00:08:30.180):**  And there's no note in further on the door anymore right.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:33.930):**  Oh no.  i'm thinking.

**no speaker (00:08:36.660):** well.

**Felicity Crawford (00:08:40.380):**  Okay.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:41.430):**  Only over remember.

**Felicity Crawford (00:08:44.250):**  is hoping.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:46.260):**  I should have sent out an announcement I forgot I didn't put on the ones.

**no speaker (00:08:51.030):** Okay.

**Felicity Crawford (00:08:53.190):**  Not to leave, perhaps you can send one out now.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:56.400):**  I will.  So funny over all this time.  Let me focus and make sure i'm doing.

**no speaker (00:09:17.760):** Okay.

**Felicity Crawford (00:09:49.290):**  Thank you for coming in.  and several others have joined us Vivian, thank you for coming in Ryan.  So we have several people on we have eight there we go students so far.  I Vivian.  hey Julie.  Thank you, and you.  Wonderful.  it's under has joined us, thank you for coming in and you.  said, the numbers are increasing slowly.  i'll wait for a few minutes for critical mass, and then i'll start.  Thank you everyone for coming.

**Adam Labadorf (00:11:20.310):**  how's the weather in DC.

**Felicity Crawford (00:11:22.380):**  You know it's not bad at all it's about 70 degrees here, what is it like in Boston.

**Adam Labadorf (00:11:28.200):**  70 it was beautiful here yesterday.

**Felicity Crawford (00:11:30.900):**  perfect.

**Adam Labadorf (00:11:31.860):**  I love it overcast.

**Felicity Crawford (00:11:33.960):**  yeah I left yesterday morning early and here's hoping that it stays Nice and warm and I can get outside after class ends.

**Anya Gupta (00:11:44.490):**  Where are you located felicity.

**Felicity Crawford (00:11:46.470):**  i'm usually in Massachusetts but right now I live between two places so i'm in DC right now.  For the next couple days.

**Anya Gupta (00:11:55.710):**  Oh Nice, I was there over spring break it was beautiful weather than to.

**Felicity Crawford (00:11:59.340):**  Oh good did you get to see the cherry blossoms.

**Anya Gupta (00:12:02.850):**  No, I just missed the cherry blossom.

**Felicity Crawford (00:12:06.780):**  Okay.  One year, you have to try.

**Anya Gupta (00:12:10.020):**  It.  it's beautiful yes definitely.

**Adam Labadorf (00:12:16.230):**  Many of the trees are filled with white flowers in Cambridge and somerville right now to.

**Felicity Crawford (00:12:20.760):**  What is.

**Adam Labadorf (00:12:22.620):**  made a little bit later.

**Felicity Crawford (00:12:24.450):**  yeah hi Ryan, I see you're coming in Jesse, thank you for coming in, so let me see the numbers right now.  and remind me how many students, we have 20.

**Adam Labadorf (00:12:39.900):**  I honestly don't remember.

**Felicity Crawford (00:12:42.330):**  Okay.

**no speaker (00:12:43.500):** I think.

**Adam Labadorf (00:12:45.030):**  The people who are here are the people that I recall seeing in class so.  Thank you all.

**Felicity Crawford (00:12:50.880):**  Thank you absolutely.  So i'll give it another minute and see if anybody else comes in.

**Adam Labadorf (00:13:21.000):**  Okay, so I put an announcement on PR result with a reminder for the link.  So should be on topic this week and next week.

**Felicity Crawford (00:13:36.720):**  give it another minute and see.  anyone else comes in.  So 10 is the number, so far, Adam is that is that some average, or is it a little.

**Adam Labadorf (00:14:12.540):**  Okay sounds about right.

**Felicity Crawford (00:14:14.820):**  Okay, so, then, should I go ahead and get started.  Okay, great well good afternoon everyone, it is really nice to, and I will put air quotes see you, I hope I get have an opportunity for us to engage before the afternoon result.  it's been such a pleasure working and learning from and with Adam and Melissa and Fred this semester.  And i'm looking forward to hearing more from you, too, so let me just make a disclaimer right now i'm not a biologist Okay, I am merely an educator with a strong commitment to ensuring that equity, which is a fundamental.  Right to the life and freedoms we enjoy today, I am committed to ensuring that those things and you're.  So, given that commitment, my goal is to really strive with you in the space for developing a deep understanding of the problems that exist and to begin to think with you, or how we can change so let's begin with a dedication.  And this is a scientist his name is person doolan it was the first African American chemist to be to be inducted into the National Academy of Sciences.  us a steroid chemist chemist and.  He was the first to figure out how to synthesize important medicinal compounds from abundant lead sources, which made made it really affordable and so you can see, on this chart that he was a pioneer for the breath control drug.  He received a lot of chemical patents about 130 of them.  I got a postage stamp had his own company and he became director of gluten paints.  Alright, so let's talk about our agenda, what I hope to achieve today is to begin to bring into view a little more clearly your understanding of history of history and historical and contemporary manifestations of science.  In doing so, I hope that we can achieve some beginning understanding into the complexities of the problem before we start to talk about solutions which will begin and pay attention to a little more in the next class.  So there are several opportunities for you to respond to it, since I don't have the benefit of being in the same physical space with you i've created a number of opportunities for you to respond.  By we're going to use minty meter you know pause shortly and i'm going to ask you to you can use emojis to react on zoom.  You can insert questions on chat you can, or you can raise your hand and speak i'm looking forward to that interaction with you alright.  So we'll do that, throughout the class.  So let's start with the mentee me to Paul and, if you would train your your phones on this.  On that qr qr code.  There are two questions there that I want you to respond to the first one is.  Always institutional racism being perpetuated or propagated in science and health today, and you have you can answer as many times as you'd like and I will, as you respond, it will pop up, let me switch out to the screen and show you what your responses and look like.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:19.980):**  Could you share that link in the chat please.

**Felicity Crawford (00:18:22.080):**  Oh yes, I can do that.  And i'm seeing that people are responding already.  Let me put it in the chat.  Do you see them.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:42.660):**  Yes, I do thanks great.

**Felicity Crawford (00:18:46.920):**  So let me share my screen again.  so that you can see what i'm, seeing as well.  So I see your responses you're identifying.  shows up a stigma shows up as a bias.  bias analysis, a lot of implicit bias.  Restricted funding lack of access to care.  And i'm wondering, are you might carry are you talking about healthcare.  Early childhood care what kind of clear.  Is it showing up keep keep adding to this.  Lack of diverse education algorithmic bias.  Problems of feedback loops yep I see your your correctly referencing that which you've been talking about all semester.  Yes, others other responses.  All right.  Thank you for sharing.  to switch back to the PowerPoint now.  Okay.  here's another opportunity for for you to respond imagine you were.  In the middle of an intersection about to be hit by a car.  Think about I want you to think about your.  Physical responses like How does your body respond to that and, this time, you can just put your responses in the chat but think about how your body responds in that moment and inserted into the chat.  So you're in the middle of an intersection you're in a car.  Or you crossing intersection on foot cars about to hit you.  See Ryan says my gentleman I guess dylan rush right Brian absolutely what is.  What happens to your heart what happens to your palms How does your stomach feel.  In searcher responses.  Increased heart rate, yes, I am what else.  says flight or freeze absolutely traumatic isn't it.  Those are two or three responses, yes.  was how does your body respond.  I know when i'm not only that would my heart rate go up my and I might be inclined to.  Either do one of two things like runner freeze depending on I guess depending on that moment at my palms are probably get sweaty I might lose all train of thoughts that I have.  And maybe what is right in front of me would be indelibly etched in my memory later is what i'm imagining.  So these are all responses to what the.  type of stress we're going to be talking about.  This really significant physical response now imagine if, and you know that if the car with a car doesn't hit to your on the sidewalk maybe 510 minutes you're not shaking anymore you're not sweaty your palms are everything is reverted to.  To a normal state after the flat belly fear or the mayor incident passes, but what is that.  What is that in in in a particular situation that you find yourself in later your body responds to in the same way, but it doesn't go away, what if that continues.  What if that level of stress that level of response for long and continues, that is, the level of stress we're talking about the prolonged activation of stress.  or your stress response systems that's what we're going to focus on, and they talk about stress and how your body responds that's the correct okay.  So we know that your heart rate rises above that she raises your respiratory rate increase your pupils dilate your veins might dilate blood glucose glucose levels might advise you might perspire.  have an urgent need to eliminate those are the kinds of things we're talking about so in the short term, as I said.  Your body.  releases epinephrine or as one of your colleagues decided to find a gentleman that's another way to describe it norepinephrine and there's a stimulation of glycogen breakdown in the liver to these glucose and you can move really quickly.  All of those things occur and and, of course, any body function any part of your body that does not contribute to what needs to happen right then.  The blood flow would be restricted to those areas only and only concentrated in the areas that that you would need to respond.  So if I were to describe that.  A little more here, if you look at this chart there were to describe.  In the short, what would happen.  What is physically happening at that time.  So, if you look at this chart you.  will see that.  The.  Long term stress response.  This is describing a long term stress response so your hypothalamus will trigger release of a ch from you're entering entering pituitary gland.  And that would stimulate the release of drupal core tickets and which cortisol once that builds up your body begins to tamp down tempo this for its own citizens rights right.  This over a prolonged period.  With this type of activity, you are subject to a number of problems like pushing syndrome.  That a party or fast heart rate osteoporosis diabetes.  This high level of cortisol coursing through your beans causes a number of inflammatory.  problems.  That chronic stress also translates to a suppressed immune system.  That leads to other problems so quiet stress can be problematic in their memory recall, in addition to all the other problems I just described.  and boost the formation of.  You know, in the moment of stress the memories that could be become very vivid cancel out almost all the other some thinking follicles that you might need to rely on so these problems.  for children could be really problematic.  Not only is it that it pleases us.  In perpetual.  perpetual risk for disease.  If cause causes a number of other problems with our Members.  So increased levels of cortisol boost the formation of memories and they can hinder because, like.  Too much cortisol as I just described causes disease and at the base of these diseases is the chronic inflammation.  So, for example, one calling one scholar Lou and a number of our colleagues proposes that stresses induced by psychological physiological and environmental stressors.  And pronounced as problematic so persistent in chronic stress leads to other neuro chemicals and hormones your transmission transmit the alterations which can precipitate the system chronic inflammation.  So I know a number of weeks ago you discussed.  With Fred and lissa.  epigenetics and abaddon you had several weeks of conversation about epigenetics and I wanted to just review that very quickly, because it has implications for people's disease state.  So epigenetics is a normal.

**no speaker (00:29:23.070):** If.

**Felicity Crawford (00:29:24.480):**  This is study of how.  How behaviors are behaviors and environment can cause changes that affect the way that our genes work, it is a normal process that happens right during the course of anybody's human life, we are exposed on one living by myself conditions which.  predispose us or triggers triggers several different types of chemical responses that are activated or silencer jeans.  And this, this is the process of turning and turning off turning on or turn off genes.  there's constant interaction between the external environment and then what happens within your body your internal environment that is required for normal functioning.  You know i'm happy maintenance, but when things, but this process can become corrupt for based on our visit some social and environmental conditions, and this is what I want to discuss with you.  there's a video that gives us a reminder of what this epigenetics is and let's take a look at it is a video by a.  Professor from Bristol university carlin welton.  She does research in tobacco and alcohol, but she does a really good quick sync job and reminding us of what genetics epigenetics is you hear her saying that.  Every cell in the body has an identical genome, what I want to clarify here is that since her statement scientists on the stand know that most cells, not all.  Have the same genetic identical genome, so there are some exceptions, so, for example, red blood cells don't have nuclei be empty cells don't insist and don't have nuclei and so.  that's right, so I just wanted to clarify that let's take a look at this video a.  thumbs up if you can see my screen, can you just let me know if you can see my screen can everyone see the screen still okay great Thank you.  All right.  Listen for controlling when our genes.  Our genome, is not just a string of DNA code, it requires signposted to bring it to life so that sells know which part of the genetic code to use and when.  This is where epigenetics enters the picture epigenetics is a mechanism for controlling when our genes on and switched off.  Every cell in our body has an identical genius but this information is interpreted in different ways to make over 200 different cells.  Such as brain cells heart cells liver, kidney and skin cells these differences in cell types are due to differences in epigenetic marks.  that cause the genetic code to be interpreted in subtly different ways epigenetics has been studied for many years, the term itself was introduced by Conrad Washington in 1942.  But it was mainly studied as part of developmental biology, more recently, the interest in epigenetics has grown enormously.  This is because it may also help us to understand how our genome malfunctions to cause disease.  For example, huge epigenetic changes go in cancer, causing cells to lose control of their growth and proliferation.  There are a multitude of different epigenetic marks on the genome, but the most common yesterday is DNA methylation.  Some DNA methylation marks, including those which decide cell time i'll lay down very early in development and our faith to be replicated throughout life.  Other DNA methylation marks can be influenced by the environment around us, for example by exposure to cigarette smoke alcohol stress or other factors.  These epigenetic changes to our genome may influence our risk of disease in later life they may in fact explain how some diseases are a consequence of both our genetic makeup and our environment.  Alternatively, these changes induced by our environment, our lifestyle or our behaviors maybe harmless but act as an archive of experiences that we have encountered over our lives.  Take the example of a mother smoking during pregnancy epigenetic changes can be detected in the blood cells have babies at birth.  i've been exposed to cigarette smoke during pregnancy and some of these changes persist for decades, they are still detectable at age 50 and beyond.  epigenetics is an exciting new area of biomedical research It promises to improve our understanding of disease mechanisms and so to help identify new treatments or ways of preventing disease.  It can also help us to understand the importance of risk factors for disease and to predict disease more effectively.  So that was just a quick review of epigenetics and when you think about all of the environmental influences, you will notice that some of them are internal others external.  When you take a look at business, some of them could either be.  beneficial or harmful.  Some of the benefits are the beneficial ones include exercise, you know the right type of from intestinal bacteria in your microbiome.  alternative medicine Some would argue it could be helpful.  Others can be downright harmful, if you think the old toxic chemicals that drugs and abuse and other problems that abuse.  And then there's diet that to can be beneficial or harmful, depending on what to eat seasonal changes could be problematic for some financial status psychological psychological state or physiological state also.  have an impact, social interactions without the therapeutic drugs of these are exported.  So when we think about.  What we're about to focus on those would binge on the social and social interactions and the physiological or psychological state that we wind up.  So again, this is.  In response we're talking about gene modification know and its effect.  In response to toxic stress.  And not insurgency the toxic stress.  Or the epigenetic modifications that occur.  are likely.  Transmissible beyond one generation to the next, if the problem is not identified.  So epigenetics is not a static state it's not permanent if people see the kinds of treatments are.  Frequent things can be reversed any changes or modifications that have to be reversed.  If it's not addressable it can transmit it to the next generation.  and  What is most.  One of the most study aspects of this modification is methylation, which is what I want to really quickly revisit Melissa to talk to you about.  methylation this video underscores the point that regulation is while it's a normally acquire and process it encompasses campuses a different set of modifications to the chromatin.  The content of course you know, is a massive genetic material that that is in the nucleus and consists of DNA and proteins moment systems right so let's take a look at this video.  epigenetic regulation encompasses a number of different modifications to chromatin These include methylation of the DNA on cytosine basis, a modification that can further be oxidized as well as modification of the histone tales that emanate from the core of the nucleus own.  Details of course histones labeled here can be altered with distinct chemical modifications, including methylation of histone H3.  settle ation of his tone H4.  And phosphorylation of his stone age to be.  You chromatin is often characterized by a more open and accessible state if the DNA.  One in which transcription factors have access to their cognitive binding sites and to therefore recruit enzymes like histone a pseudo transfer races, that a satellite who's known tales and activate genes by recruiting components of the basal transcription machinery, including RNA polymerase.  hetero chromatin and contrast is 30 be characterized by a more repressive tight bundling of nuclear zones which impedes transcription factors from gaining access to regulatory sites on the DNA.  methylation of cytosine basis and regions called cpt islands is a hallmark of transcription only repressed header or chromatin these methods set of scenes in turn recruit proteins like me CP two methods cpt G binding protein to an HP one hetero chromatin protein one.  These proteins are thought to maintain a repressive state of chrome written by inducing histone de escalation by H decks.  As well as histone to methylation by histone metal transfer race enzymes.  So with methylation is the most intensive study the best understood of the DNA modifications.  So let's talk a little bit more about methylation.  I just wanted you to know to before we continue that this process then become operates.  Because of psychological insights.  don't genes that are normally activated can become silence.  That could become a problem, and so you looked at the video just know that identify on tumor suppressor genes that side of that can lead to consider as well.  So the enzymes that catalyze methylation are called DNA metal chance releases, so therefore types of the DNA empty, one which is really involved with the maintenance of cells is being into three and get into 3D and those are responsible for.  For methylation and then being empty.  Any disruption any levels of the lmt three a or DNA MP3 before example needs to decide normal methylation and abnormal methylation isn't it is stress causes our normal methylation So if you run into one is disrupted, then normal June silencing which ordinary uppers would not occur.  And if you're an MP3 a or.  B is disrupted hyper methylation or too much methylation the accord or Hypo methylation too little vehicle.  So genes can be silenced, if any of those enzymatic processes are interacting.  So this chart here tells us or gives us another way to think about this so here's the promoter.  notice here methylation site this.  site that i'm sorry in June promoters recruit a.  method inside.  metal site to see a binding proteins, these are the naacp to.  These me CP to bind the historic recruits are buying things historic.  places in cities, each Dax and in defining process as a few groups are removed from the stones and then, as the two groups are removed from the stones positive charges I removed right.  And once that happens, the DNA becomes compacted I think Adam told you in the mood syllable quality content and comebacks and relaxes when that compact when that.  DNA complex hd the Ajax calls go with implementation, that is what silences gene expression.  here's another video that describes exactly what I was just trying to explain.  For hair the gene being transcribed and next day you'd see a simulated histones nice open thomason now you catch this little metal sarkozy's methyl groups is appearing and here comes the protein it binds.  will attract this protein complex, along with the enzyme that the escalators and now as adults are gone.  And histones become.  Competent closes.  No transcription factors and come through.  And Regina silent.  So what we're beginning to get out here is that their potential.  Their potential consequences for when.  In some other.  problems occur.  Their physiological consequences so certain types of chronic environmental stresses have been shown to cause gene hyper methylation.  So there's been a couple of studies.  That show when this occurs when children are subjected to quantify bullying, or even when they feel a sense of aloneness is significant intense loneliness.  hyper methylation is probably likely occurred.  As well in preschool age children from low socio economic backgrounds who face all kinds of economic instability.  The problem begins the.  hyper methylation can occur at the same time, so there are physiological consequences, I know a few weeks ago Fred may have shared this study and voltage just briefly refer you to.  This was a study of.  Mothers in Rwanda.  There, but in but remember to study but thumbs up if you do.  thumbs up if you don't remember the study.  yeah I see it.  Now, yes, yes, great.  So just quickly to recap study of pregnant women in London, so the study your cohorts one.  One cohort was in Rwanda, the time of the genocide so maybe this all kinds of violence and the other cohorts of London mothers or outside of the country also pregnant they checked the blood blood test and found out that.  That they were genetic changes on epigenetic changes that occur, many of these modifications appalling genes that were previously indicated in mental health disorders such as ptsd and depression.  And study.  really is.  On the cutting edge of research there's much more that needs to be done much more research that needs to be done.  What the findings suggest that prenatal genocide exposure was associated with epigenetic changes that were suggested suggested have reduced even function in the offspring, so this is what they found out that the changes that occurred in mothers were translated to their children.  with of course more studies that I needed was another study that another.  set of scientists on Jewish families that fun, but some of the same results.  So these are early studies, but it's worrisome but.  The kinds of stresses appearance experience, particularly at.  early stages of development in pregnancy, if they are not treated, or if they're not stress isn't going the problems for the next generation begin right then makes me worry and wonderful what's happening to.  Parents were pregnant women in the moment.  So in one word I just wondering how does the possibility that that that the stress parents are experiencing now can be transmitted to children if that stresses that either be.  alleviated or if it persists How does that strike you in one word for it in the chat I just want to know what you're thinking about as you think about these possibilities.  So let me see what I see.  Faced with the possibility of epigenetic changes that transmit from one from mother to child.  What is your one word response to that possibility.  When you think about all of the environmental.  challenges that people are facing today.  As soon as possible possibility striking concerning just the same science and striking what is what is another word that opposed to think about this.  You know right right I to open certain justin says the same thing.  What are some other thoughts.  Just think, many people outside of size do not consider that their physiological consequences to that have an impact on your.  health status.  right also says it's tomato tomato yes absolutely.  Yes, more studies are needed, but it's It really is worse it's making that the psychological stress that we experienced and have consequences.  will come back to talking about that again shortly, let me switch to thank you for sharing your thoughts.  shift to another way in which things.  get more than.  Two weeks ago, about two years, three years on repeating the sequence at the end of chromosomes right they present prevent chromosome from losing based spears sequences of it.  And they stop chromosomes from fusing to each other.  Each time a cell divides some of the team members last when the telomere becomes too short, the chromosome, which is a critical lengthen can no longer replicate the cell becomes to all them dies by process identified all called apoptosis like.  telomeres are controlled by an enzyme telomerase too much telomerase activity.  equals to watch TV and that again can lead to cancer.  So when we think about chronic stress severe chronic psychological stress accelerates the rate of 70 aging by increasing anticipatory direct responses from life stressors.  So stressful situations really not only agency, it is a selfie this.  weathering it's a phenomenon that Melissa described to a number of weeks ago, what is whether they just in a quick response.  In chat today.  What would you say is rather quickly describe it in a few words.  What is it.  let's see.  Oh.  I just want to acknowledge, I see, I saw that being said, it is shocking and surprising, and that is surprising.

**no speaker (00:53:24.450):** That the.

**Felicity Crawford (00:53:26.580):**  epigenetics dressing changes can be transmitted so any so Adam is saying we're entering your body do the stress that's one way to describe whether we accelerated aging external stressors accelerated aging absolutely all of those answers are correct.  So the high levels of stress in the polls are victims of this as a result of what I enjoy most coined the phrase, whether he identifies it as early deterioration.  already have situation chronic mobile more morbidity and excess mortality so chronic disease and it says that this will be the systems in the body.  These disruptions and do really to the high effort that is needed to be persistent Chronicle toxic stresses stressors that result from social and economic adversity and from political morning marginalization, so in a region by society.  If you're if you're exposed to racism and the problems that assume fumbles you're on the chronic stress that chronic stress can lead to disease disease comes out and all kinds of things, not only to your own death Robin Theo but definitely we definitely and.  and increase the likelihood that this stuff gets passed on to your children.  In addition to that, the high effort causes an increase in an individual's our static mood or wear and tear on the body and the brain.  from being constantly stressed excess stress, in other words as damaging health consequences such as chronic inflammatory diseases, diabetes, hypertension asthma.  And because of success stress these inflammatory diseases manifest more often in people who are marginalized by blacks Latinos like in today's environment trans people.  So that stress is automatically.  margin margin.  And not many people understand that stress.  And cortisol excess cortisol.  Excessive inflammation the disease that made me understand that, so people think about racism as a psychological thing words my Turkey circumstances might hurt my pocket.  But there's more insidious are problematic result you can buy it could kill you.  When we think, for example, about.  Coffee excessive excessive stress and chronic inflammation have been shown to influence the outcomes of patients with the disease.  So there's evidence of an emerging relationship between stress chronic inflammation.  immune responses and disease that negative disproportionately impact blacks and other people of color so according to NIH, for example.  And he did a.  He has a document.  As a document that be put up on their website on the 16th of December last year.  They assert that.  Corporate maintenance triggers a heightened response of interleukin six or ios six, this is a pro inflammatory cytokines.  This shows that the diseases associated with systemic inflammation and hypoxic respiratory failure right it isn't systemic inflammation imagine if you get a disease and it's causing even more in in even more of an inflammatory response or immune system is breaking so hard to.  write your body that excessive information as a site is a result of that experience know you mentioned that your person who's already.  who's already was bodies already impacted by high inflammation.  You could you see how the any disease that causes even more problems with inflammation can can result in in their death, so you get an excessive.  inflammatory site to paint storm, in other words quoted 19 contributors excessive inflammatory response.  And, as I was saying, imagine what would happen if the are battling already an inflammatory response to the client brought on by product stress.  So, coupled with the weakened immune system with other environmental conditions that we know where the case for black folks and we had disease exposure ready they had.  Closer exposure to the disease to their work situations, many of them will work from home lack of people all of these things put together.  By the results, I was deadly and still remain so for many minorities so known have, for example, Johns Hopkins collect the data from a whole lot of almost every state right.  And they break down covert 19 response of binaries and they will be in a review that lexicon 34% more calls and making this in Washington, in particular, Washington DC area.  That residents account for to be four to 5% of the population, it used to be a lot of higher long time ago today it's about four to 5% of the population, but then nonetheless account for approximately 75%, of course, in 19 75% some are saying is even higher than that today.  And so, this was some.  Data from last year last year end right.  it's likely.  So, think about the physiological cons bear in mind the physiological consequences of stress on your disease state right.  it's all that constant from with it and let's think about children and what they experience about trauma is has become.  Unfortunately, a bit fellow for many children to the even the children whose parents died from coven and we know that there are other mitigating factors, well before cool virtual.  Bear in mind you're talking about the chronic or toxic stress and what do you know their researchers who are identifying racism evangelism gender bias, it says, of all those things.  In the chronic stress chronic toxic stress which there are created defining it as historical or generational trauma so for many of our kids have.  Problems with in relation to race, for example, they don't get resolved in appearance and lots of times in there just ference gestational period these things get transmitted so children are already born with problems that compound over time.  so that it becomes a graphic that I just shared with you.  i'm.  really has.  Has me concerned know not only about the physiological consequences, but the potential psychological consequences consequences of that what is even further behind, and not to forget that women fall in this category, women are also.  subject so gender bias just gender women trans people queer people learn by.  they're all subjected to this historical our generational trauma the suicide rates for example chance kids.  is really high and concerning and I just learned last night, for example, if Alabama has a ban on children receiving gender affirming clear.  we're doing this with no full understanding as a general population of the physiological challenges that many people are born with this idea that sex is binary.  male or female causes all kinds of problems, and if you were to adopt them and why, for example, they will tell you in witnessing many life birds.  that many children are born with them biggest genitalium that's another conversation for another time, but we are compounding the trauma that children experience.  By the very policies that.  So children in persistent trauma.  They are subject to.  The kinds of responses that are not necessarily normal their own ones are for the most part on constant yellow alert.  So shovel is always covered they're always looking for what is the next thing so they're likely to be more reactive than the fears to external stressors.  There that are complicated by the pace of things that have happened in schools, we know children experience a lot of bullying, you know the children, depending on their race, are either marginalized by teachers or ignored, some are pushed out.  So i'm always surprised that more children.  That some children action fear will squeeze, given the circumstances right.  So these children are always over reading the threat.  Which leads the lower brain function it don't have enough brain space to think about the higher order type.  cognitive functions that we go for it expecting children, they tend to strike out physically or verbally.  Somebody beat the classroom so much up, though.  They are seeing themselves as having to in order to survive and be defensive and their posture of defensiveness is justified given their circumstances So you see how that becomes a cycle, it is really hard for them to be.  Young children are not immune from these experiences, even as young children they're impacted by trauma.  They spend a lot of time in law or state level of fear of not being able to read adults nonverbal cues getting set them up for all kinds of problems, so they may not necessarily interpret innocent or neutral looks as either.  They might you know we might think our responses are benign but think about the child was a persistent context of marginalization.  humiliation and you name it all the stresses of come with racism or any of the other isms I just described, their responses will look a little different.  So trauma and children manifests in in in specific ways for many the word for them is not asleep, please they understand people as wanting to hurt them they're free they're free that nobody will help them and and for many that's actually true.  they begin to earth internalize these prophets that they feel unworthy.  It don't think that things will get better.  And some of them decide, you know what I have to establish my own power to control things are always things will go further right imagine, this is the next generation that we are creating.  That to me is worrisome.  I want to hold this strikes you.  were hoping for a world in which children with learning leads us somewhere leads us to productive environment.  But in fact what researchers are finding that racism itself is causing this country in excess of $1 trillion every year.  Not to mention that children are learning what they need to learn, it affects their ability to acquire language and communication skills affects their ability to understand cause and effect in affects their ability to take another another person's perspective.  Children have difficulty attending to classroom instruction they have difficulty raking leaves and emotions, we know that.  Children of color are suspended at such high rates it's it's it's incredible children in preschooler expelled from school imagine in three and a half years and been expelled from school.  difficulties in Beijing and the curriculum is a real on problematic and growing.  And since the carbon 19 pandemic has exacerbated learning in schools, we haven't been more problems there's a higher need for mental health counselors have significant shortage of mental health counselors teachers don't understand.  How to address these problems because they were trained to teach not to address holistically what's going on with kids but now we understand that.  kids can learn if all these things are are are a threat to them so they have difficulty with executive function, which is necessary for learning, they have difficulty making plans organizing work and following.  So, consequently, to fix their academic performance their lower scores on on standardized tests.  They have problems, moving from one grade to the next and, as I mentioned before, expelled at higher rates.  These results by into what I know you've discussed a number of weeks ago with Adam and with Fred about intelligence, we have particular beliefs around intelligence that blacks are not smart and we've spent scientists have spent many years.  honing those understandings.  What the newest scientists are also seeing is that, in order to mitigate some of these systemic problems we have to really pay attention or doing a holistic analysis of the problems that children are and people are facing.  So we can only look as physicians if we are physicians so the.  Physical problems that people present sometimes looking at their socio political context, that means another leads you to a more comprehensive response are more successful response i'll show you a video shortly have adopted talking about that very thing so every human.  Society has worked to justify the time the types of any qualities that exist so unless reasons for them or phone the whole political and social.  edifice stands in danger of collapse right so in some ways spot very long and very hard to justify the kinds of qualities that exists and.  And those are the qualities are in a lot of instances are substantiated by one ideological view or another, so we have.  sexism as a one way to justify women white women should be subservient to men, we have even ISM to talk about to support the idea that people disabilities are not worth it, we have racism as a as a way of.  explaining this necessary precondition that signals the right for people to have a society that is premised on the assumption of inequality to sort of continue to stay there, there is no need to locate the cause of underlings their positions in some specific characteristics.  Because they're less worthy.  So we have developed with the aid of science and not only said, but other other fields as well.  But science has been at the forefront, you know we tend to think about sciences, giving things if you can explain things scientifically it gives more credibility.  To the idea of inequality and we've been at it for a long time, I know that you've talked about this, we talked about with a mess and so on.  So what today is disrupting that assumption.  More and more people are arguing and demanding our commitment to the ideas that we expose in this country and other Western nations have equal rights, about freedom and about the quality.  group subsystem medically be died entitlements, the whole lot of people and and folks are saying you know what it is not right, but this should happen, we know that example.  What happened with George floyd last year galvanized many of new people to say you know what this is not like you have to speak up and so young folks have been leading the way.  into into helping us the right circumstances that we've continued to create perpetuate over generations.  So that gives me hope.  So.  I wanted to talk to you just a little bit about how folks in in.  in the medical field.  Led by of all organizations, I know you know the American Medical Association.  association that sort of.  Government relations for doctors and so on, this is what they said.  Is that they know that their knowledge that ratio capitalism created our modern world, so this whole system is organized around racism and every system, including our healthcare system is implicitly on the guarded by ratio capitalism.  And they say recent capitalism promotes competition and exploitation of natural resources, leading to the destruction of depletion of resources and doing so it widens the inequities inequities for blacks for indigenous people and people of color.  And I would argue.  People who are LGBT Q a as well.  This persistent cycle of structural violence contributes to the generational and recurring travel that negatively affects health and well being this is coming from the E me.  ratio capitalism created the modern world that is given to them.  And in schools we're still trying to find ways to support that we live in a myriad of interconnected dynamic systems that span law that's been politics that spans civil society, the market.  And regulation these systems are really highly very reflective change in any one of them precipitates some kind of change in the other.  And it's these systems, even when they're designed with objectivity in mind brings the miners and thinking about this.  You know Adams missing a couple of weeks ago on the scene decision making processes and we tell you to optimal living requires and it's a general.  It is the decisions that happened before we get to the algorithms what you put in, is what gets us the product, the problem, so the machine decision making processes are evident that are evident in deep learning.  Those two are subject to by the late night is.  And today, people are talking about regulations or regulatory regulatory mechanisms for correcting the weaknesses our province in the system.  And so we have to recognize.  The fact.  That because we are human liable to for holding different values or value systems and having those influence what we do we have to be aware that.  It is within these regulatory regulatory interface that our systems, as well as us as individuals have the potential to either flourish or language or not.  And so, how does ratio capitalism show up in our contemporary society is what i'm wondering.  How does it show up in science, how does it show up in education.  Well, in the US, we know that there's pervasively inequality right.  I think you would all agree and and my inequality here's what I mean.  On even or unjust distribution of resources that's the definition that comes from the literature by simply call into the 20 on even or unjust distribution of resources.  In wealth in income in material and social and educational situations so many of these inequalities that we observe today sharp as gaps gaps and wealth gaps in income.  And the result are inequities in equities based on gender in equities based on race in equities based on ethnicity in inequities based on religion in equities based on sexual orientation and we can go down to the stripe.  So many people who are disadvantaged or their pipe not to personnel inadequacy at all.  But economic and not by economic accident either, but the conscious public policies that excluded them from fear and just access to opportunity.  So notice that we've talked about the physiological consequences of stress to know looking at societal problems that compound the stressors that people experience.  So, before I continue let's talk a little bit about healthcare before I show you this video.  Black women in the US, I know you talked about this, a number of weeks ago, yes.  Alright, so black women in the US experienced the highest maternal more but mom or ability and pregnancy associated mortality rates.  So in 2017, for example in Chicago and give you one example.  There was a study of 527 women who experience severe maternal morbidity at a rate of 7174 74% 4000 4400 10,074 out of every 10,000 women.  10,000 deliveries that was some of that was four to 5% higher than the rate of the state of Illinois so they're looking at Chicago and they found that the mortality rates marginally with is marginally higher than the all of your cargo itself.  More folks dying in childbirth than in the seat, which in the in the state of those four to 48 400,000.  So by April of 2021 hello, I became the first state in the nation to expand medicare coverage from 60 days postpartum to 12 months.  The waiver should be should she should lower the number of women who are dying but.  policymakers are people are beginning to recognize, but the black women will suffer the highest morbidity and mortality, which should benefit from any on should also benefit from medicaid.  But the medicaid expansion alone is not going to do it, especially when we think about all the other disparities that they face.  So the State would also need to eliminate the barriers to access, they would need to think about structural racism in hip hop shows up in the healthcare system to their policies.  The they need to think about people's access to obstetric care they need to think about.  economic hardship, so they have to think beyond.  What they see coming into the door in terms of disease state or province, they have to think about people's economic hardship, they have to think about food insecurity, they have to think about housing, they have to think about health literacy What do people know about.  How you prepare for the birth of a child, we have to think about education and all the other harmful social determinants of health.  That are problematic, so the problem is not that simple positive social determinants do not solve the problem by itself, either, it has to be that we pay attention to the health care system.  We have to think about the social determinants and we have to think in much more complex than you and Lawrence please I self regulating health care market, so people are saying let's just take care of moving the government out of this and things will take care of itself wouldn't.  trauma informed anti racist here and policies and regulations is what some people are calling for let's take a look at.  A physician.  manchanda who is who works out of La so belly if you know anything about South la boys in the hood.  It all kinds of problems is the same place where you might be too young to know about rodney King same place very good.  Alright, so let's take a look at this video, I think I may have to step out of this video out of this PowerPoint to show you the video I couldn't.

**Adam Labadorf (01:22:18.390):**  yeah Firstly, one question um you haven't been sharing your screen.  I wasn't sure if that was intended.  You meant to but.  it's just been you know lovely face talking.

**Felicity Crawford (01:22:29.070):**  Oh, my goodness i'm absolutely meant to share my screen she's next time it happens to me right away.  Okay, thank you.  Alright, so i'm sharing my screen now yeah I was thinking i'm sharing my screen with you are okay, can you see this now.

**Adam Labadorf (01:22:45.270):**  Yes, sir.

**no speaker (01:22:46.590):** Okay.

**Felicity Crawford (01:22:49.770):**  perfect.  For over a decade, as a doctor i've cared for homeless veterans for working class families.  i've care for people who live in working conditions that can be hard it's not hard.  Now, work has led me to believe that we need a fundamentally different way of looking at healthcare.  We simply need to healthcare system that moves beyond just looking at the symptoms that bring people into clinics and instead actually is able to look and improve health where it begins.  Where health begins, is not in the four walls of the doctor's office.  But where we live and where we work.  We eat sleep, learn and play where we spend the majority of our lives.  So what is this different approach to healthcare look like an approach that can improve health where it began.  illustrate this i'll tell you about Veronica.  Veronica was the 17th patients out of my 26 patient day if that clinic in South central Los Angeles.  She came into our clinic with a chronic headache this headache have been going on for a number of years and this particular episode was very, very helpful.  In fact, three weeks before she came to visit us for the first time she went to an emergency room in Los Angeles.  The emergency room doctor said we run some tests Veronica, the results are normal so here's some pain medication and follow up with a primary care doctor, but if the pain persists, or if it worsens then come on back.  Veronica follow those standard.  instructions and she went back.  She went back, not just once but twice more in the three weeks before Veronica met us she went to the emergency Room three times, she went back and forth in and out of hospitals and clinics, just like she had done in years past trying to seek relief, but still coming up short.  Veronica came to our clinic and despite all these encounters with healthcare professionals Veronica was still sick.  When she came to our clinic that we tried a different approach.  approach started with our medical assistant someone who had a ged level training, but knew the Community a medical assistant asked them routine questions she asked what's your chief complaint at it.  let's get your vital signs measure your blood pressure and your heartbeat.  let's also asked about something equally as vital to Veronica and a lot of patients, like her in South Los Angeles Veronica, can you tell me about where you live.  specifically about your House and conditions do you have mold you have water, do you have roaches you know turns up Veronica said yes to three of those things roaches water Oh, I received that chart and hand reviewed it I turn the handle on the door and I entered the room.  You should understand Veronica like a lot of patients that I have the privilege of caring for is a dignified person.  or formidable presence, a personality that's larger than life, but he or she was doubled over in pain sitting on my exam table for head clearly throbbing was resting in her hands, she lifted her head up and I saw her face said Hello.  And then I immediately noticed something across the bridge of your nose decrease in her skin in medicine, we call that creates the allergic salute.  it's usually seen among children who have chronic allergies, it comes from chronically rubbing ones nose up and down trying to get rid of those allergy symptoms and yet here was Veronica a grown woman with the same telltale sign of our.  A few minutes later and asking Veronica some questions and examining her and listening to her, I said Veronica I think I know what you have you have chronic allergies.  I think you have migraine headaches and some sinus congestion and I think all of those are related to where you live.  If you look a little bit relieved, because for the first time she had a diagnosis, but it said Veronica now let's talk about your treatment.  we're going to order some medications for your symptoms, but I also want to refer you to a specialist if that's okay.  Now specialists are a little hard to find in South central Los Angeles so she gave me this look like really.  I said Veronica actually the specialist i'm talking about in someone I call a Community health worker.  Someone who if it's okay with you can come to your home and try to understand what's going on with those water weeks matt mole and try to help you manage those conditions in your housing that I think are causing it.  And, if required, that specialist might refer you to another specialist that we call a public interest lawyer, because it might be that your landlord isn't making the fixes these required to make.  Veronica came back in a few months later, she agreed to all those treatment plans.  He told us that her symptoms that improved by 90%.  She was spending more time at work and with her family and less time shuttling back and forth between the emergency rooms of Los Angeles.  Veronica had improved remarkably her sons one of them had asthma was no longer as sick as they used to be she had gotten better and not coincidentally Veronica is home was better to.  What was it about this different approach that we tried that lead to better care.  Fewer visits to the er that our health.  What quite simply started with that question Veronica where do you live.  But, more importantly, it was that we put in place a system that allowed us to routinely asked questions like Veronica and hundreds more like are about the conditions that mattered.  In her community about where health and unfortunately sometimes business does begin in places like South la.  And that Community substandard housing, food insecurity or the major conditions that we, as a clinic had to be aware of, but in other communities, it could be transportation, there is obesity access to parks non violence.  important thing is, we put in place a system that works it's an approach that I call an upstream approach it's a term any of you familiar with it comes from a parable it's very common in the public health community.  This is a parable of three friends imagine that you're one of these three friends who come to a river.  it's beautiful scene, but it's shattered by the cries of child.  and actually several children in need a rescue in the water, so you do, hopefully, what everybody would do you jump right in along with your friends.  The first friend says i'm going to rescue those were about drown those at most risk of falling over the waterfall the second friend says, you know i'm going to build a raft i'm going to make sure that.  Fewer people need to end up at the waterfalls edge let's usher more people to safety by building this raft coordinating those branches together.  Over time they're successful but not really as much as they want to be more people sit through and finally woke up and they see that there are third friend is nowhere to be seen.  They finally spotter she's in the water swimming away from them upstream rescuing children actually goes and they shout out to her where you going there are children here to say, and she says back i'm going to find out who or what is throwing these children in the water.  want to pause here for a while, because I want to hear from you.

**no speaker (01:29:49.050):** Next action for a moment. For example, a.

**Felicity Crawford (01:30:12.270):**  doctor the doctors visits itself.  I think there's some regulation something.  spent about 10 or 15 minutes with you correct me if i'm wrong.  or anyone else, and they spend little time asking questions.  And here's this doctor talking about.

**no speaker (01:30:36.300):** Thinking beyond.

**Felicity Crawford (01:30:39.720):**  The symptoms themselves to try to find them, and so what are people's thoughts about.  The system itself.  And what his doctors.  Or the results will be back from the patient to give a different.  set of prescriptions do.

**Adam Labadorf (01:31:06.330):**  So my first thought was that our healthcare system is sort of engineered for high throughput you.  Like you do have 1015 at Max like you have to justify longer than 30 minute appointments.  And you know.  I think it's no surprise that our health system doesn't work for many people, for that reason.  But what I was wondering about is you know he indicated a Community health worker.  I imagined Community health organizations are not engineer for throughput.  And so you know we were constantly dealing with.  finite resources.  And I wonder how possible, it is to like for everyone who needed that sort of service like are the resources available, even if it was identified that that was the.  You know the actual prescription.

**Felicity Crawford (01:32:10.140):**  Interesting that you say that.  i'm.

**Adam Labadorf (01:32:13.620):**  A scientist in.

**Felicity Crawford (01:32:15.210):**  Last week, about a lot of classes.  About that very thing she actually did a study at Bu medical as well.  And she works with people with autism she didn't study English they developed a mall for somebody to interface with the Community that she called out on medical navigator.  So this person would interview would be this form that they would share where they asked questions together at some of the social determinants.  of health that impact people's living conditions, they ask explicitly, what do you need that kind of thing and they created this role for health navigator to do that kind of interviewing and to connect people with the resources that they needed.  And what they found out in the end of this is that the people can have that opportunity to engage with.  Their their their health outcomes world significantly higher than those who just keep into the medical into be Boston medical and that similar standard of care, you just described.  And so I said also know it's in place right no it's not in place because there's no money, she was able to use the money to do that and now she's embarking on other studies that have to justify for ensures why doing something like this would work.  Even though the results from that study are significantly.  There was a significant difference between the two groups it's still not in place because of financial.  commitment that it would move, but when I think about that young woman who went from one hospital to the next, if you were to add up all those costs is much cheaper to just get a navigator.  yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (01:34:19.920):**  What is yeah you're right, I mean that's exactly the tax would have to take, and this relates back to a question you posed earlier that I didn't know how to answer at the time, but what are examples of racial capitalism.  like this right here is an example of racial capitalism it's baked into the economics of that system.  That you know insurance incentivizes throughput a very specific.  You know, medical types of services.  And there doesn't there may not be the same economic incentives for providing this broader, more holistic type of treatment yet.  But like you say I bet if you could in fact sum up all the costs, you could say that you know insurance companies would actually it's in their financial interest.  To to pursue these other because I imagine like having someone go to check out mold in an apartment is less expensive than you know, a hospital stay or an emergency room visit so that that's how we could work that.

**Felicity Crawford (01:35:25.980):**  Thank you.  audience, I know that you all have family members who faced a medical healthcare system into the.

**no speaker (01:35:34.710):** box.

**Felicity Crawford (01:35:43.800):**  Yes.

**Amanda Katchmar (01:35:47.640):**  Okay hey yeah um I know we were talking about you know, especially like why aren't there more navigators you know care navigators why wouldn't.  You know, private insurers definitely wouldn't care because people who are most likely to use those services wouldn't be enrolled in private insurance anyway they'd be on their medicaid and there are there are some states that are doing things.  For like home and community based services, you know waivers but that's not standard like the state has to say, we want to pay for these things and there's only a limited amount of money.  That that's there to go around you know.  I think like yeah it is it's just how the system is set up to incentivize like acute care for anything.  You know, and I I think what this doctor is doing is admirable, but I don't think most doctors, you know my doctors never asked like where do I live and like you know what's the condition that i'm living in and.  I think it just shows that there needs to be this like shift in how we think about caring for people and what well being really means because all of this is like.  it's super frustrating to hear about and I, you know realize the sort of privilege that I live in because I don't I can't relate to that sort of thing.  But it I, I want to be able to fix it, you know or helped to work to make those changes like i'm curious about the the person that you were talking about a pmc who is working on this sort of research i'd be curious to know who they are.

**no speaker (01:37:17.850):** Who.

**Felicity Crawford (01:37:19.680):**  remembers Dawson.  I am so glad that you want to do, because you identified or you immediately connected with social economic.  differences that folks would require these kinds of interventions we see i'm showing you is as Adam identified in the last class is what you call it catch, what is the description of it out of.  The vm CS the.  place of.

**Adam Labadorf (01:37:51.600):**  safety net hospital.

**Felicity Crawford (01:37:52.710):**  safety net there's always looking for the safety net.  hospital where people have not great means no material will show up for to.  Different from the folks who are insured and after the jobs and they make sure that the big movements, for example, or opportunity.  The questions are not important in that context, so you would never find people having to respond to those right.  The study that just included was actually looking at other actually included.  participants from other cities that Philadelphia and other places that serve people.  Have no material means.  And what she found was that there were significant difference between those who have not had navigator except for Philadelphia Philadelphia had some things in place.  So much so that the result between those who had the help navigating those who didn't it was almost no difference so it's possible and if you've already been over Philadelphia know lots of folks.  kind of surface.

**Amanda Katchmar (01:39:12.390):**  Interestingly, oh go ahead.

**Felicity Crawford (01:39:14.220):**  Go ahead.

**Amanda Katchmar (01:39:15.090):**  No, I just can say interesting I was on a zoom call I say last week with the Director of maternal health.  In the affiliate Department of Health and she was talking about the different programs that they they need to do, because they don't get buy in from the state, you know as somebody from.  Pennsylvania, I know kind of what the politics of the state are like and how they generally don't want to send resources to a place like Philadelphia, but so they're trying to make do with with home visits, with different outreach programs that are like Community based.  It was just really interesting to see what she was working on what she was doing.

**Felicity Crawford (01:39:50.460):**  And if you if you want to.  connect to actually do some.  Studying on some significant implications for what should happen.  Thank you for she yeah.

**no speaker (01:40:04.320):** Thank you.

**Adam Labadorf (01:40:07.110):**  So felicity to just a quick question about that you said, in the case of Philadelphia, that there was a group that did have the Community health, like the Navigator and the group.

**Felicity Crawford (01:40:17.100):**  Was navigating life and the event, you know, there was a control group, where people got the magnetosphere right.  And what they found was that there was no significant difference between the two groups, because what was in place for the regular care was way more than many other places the kinds of.  Services and things that are offered that probably caught the issues that they have had to get to is being attached, so they had similar results.

**Adam Labadorf (01:40:49.980):**  See well I.

**Felicity Crawford (01:40:52.530):**  said again.

**Adam Labadorf (01:40:53.580):**  there's an well.  i'm putting my scientist, I just passionate scientist had on here and there's another explanation, which is that the Navigator was just totally ineffective.

**Felicity Crawford (01:41:05.580):**  well.  One could argue that, but if you have a navigate if you have navigated we're training the same way across four different sites and cycles, the only place where those results showed up differently when controlling for everything else.

**Adam Labadorf (01:41:24.990):**  i'm not arguing that i'm just saying you know that's also what.  explain that pattern.  Right and so people detractors people who don't believe in this could easily look at that study and see like see navigators don't help.  To be i'm just trying to be aware of the naysayers and what arguments they might make lightning.

**Felicity Crawford (01:41:44.400):**  Right right.

**Adam Labadorf (01:41:46.740):**  What I like about what.

**Felicity Crawford (01:41:49.050):**  One shonda was saying is that we need to tap into all of the social determinants that impact, where we live on the word, for we interact those things are significant in that way.  Another scholar at B and C is i've been i've been checking in with them to see what what is happening in the street i'm not a scholar, my name is Mina mechanical she actually.  Is a psychologist and director of i'd love you've heard of child witness the violence project they see a lot of the challenging situations in the State of Massachusetts we have.  several different systems.  That somebody have a question.  they've developed several different systems to respond.  And so they recently in a paper that was published just about less than a month ago, is it you know what the standard of care.  Or what we could refer to as a standard of care auto be responsive to the environment in which people are living and working in.  The system, and we have to think more about you think about how we become a transformative holistic empowering adaptive reflective and diversity informed system of here.  This requires personal and organizational accountability, it requires us to be transparent and understanding of the role of bias privilege and power.  And the legacies of structural racism legacies of historical trauma and the types of oppression that continue to exist that harm black indigenous people of color and I would I would argue, all the other groups that have been marginalized including including trans folks.  So this is what you're calling for.  And as you as we take a break we're going to see what time it is or we're almost out of the time so maybe I should continue, and then and emotional response I didn't give you much of a break.  Is that okay with everybody else I got caught up in give you a break, I hope you grab a drink it.  Is everyone Okay, with my continuing.  thumbs up if you are okay all right thanks amanda.  All right, so.  In order to understand how we begin to think about.  How we act.  let's try to continue to bring together this picture that you're forming know in our mind, so we understand that there is some.  physiological consequences right, we understand that stresses at the bottom of much of all the problems people face in terms of racism, we understand that it interrupts children's cognitive functioning spoons We understand that it places them increased risk for disease and death.  We have to understand and we're beginning to see that as Adam pointed out that there's some problems in whole the health care system is set up to incentivize.  Economic.  profit.  let's let's go back and take another look at how science science to justify the things that we do miss using science of justify racism is a thing.  it's been going on for a long time you've had a a comprehensive conversation about that in order to change something really have to face it head on, so this is why i'm going back to a more you talked about it right into this is a quick way to.  Go back by the end of the 18th century pronouncements of size became the preferred method.  for reconciling difference between principle and practice so attempts to justify policies and discriminate discriminate against people were me and unscientific brothers using three scientific explanations.  And this word comes from on a scholar who tried to put this in context of science.

**Adam Labadorf (01:46:27.390):**  Firstly, one question did you plan to share the screen.

**Felicity Crawford (01:46:30.180):**  Oh, thank you, please, yes, let me do pretty quickly.  Okay So here we are, can you see it.  Let me put it on.  Yes, thank you for reminding me out of officiated.  So, here it is three explanations that you can try to.  describe.  These three scientific explanation so some people say you know what biological dangers innovation in the meeting basis remember davenport that's very first study that you did at the beginning of the Semester.  Against into.  This is such a nation.  Instead of you know, integrating leads to prohibitions against interracial marriage into march could produce genetic disharmony these.  Children of mixed race or considered more Elliot intellectually inferior nevermind davenport studying wasn't the study was based on opinion and read the whole book.  He tried to wedding define some results That said, you know what this math test and the blackwater ended up doing better than the white folks who didn't have a good explanation of.  The madness was not that was not the purpose of this work, these people's arms are longer it's easy for them to pick things up, and you know.  So.  This study itself as part of the body, and there are many such studies and remember that important they had about significant institute here, so it was not outside of the regular field of science, that is working.  So some groups were considered here's another explanation so considered cognitive.  cognitive and behavioral traits so that's.  It, this is one of the reasons why you should continue this, as we are.  So black research or research from blackboard at this time, completely and amenities still you know there's a platform for understanding anything.  People were more focused on on what searches that.  Nature, you know nature is one of the white institutions are.  responsible for bias in scholarship they are actually admitted listen, if you want anything about nature Springer nature is one of the largest and most significant publishing companies.  Last year alone, George avoidance, the victim of incentive or you're really sorry you're responsible.  For scientific racism in science and you have to be something to change it, they actually said that here's what they said, like researchers have long been denied a platform and established institutions such as this one, we recognize that nature is one of the white institutions that.  That is responsible for bias in search and scholarship the enterprise and science has been an instant.  systemic racism, but it must strive harder to collect these and justices by marginalized voices scientist Elon musk listen let's go in and change.  What a statement came on prompted really surprising to the depth of everybody, looking at this one incident, I remember looking at Martin on like.  To move us.  This was right after Jewish for this.  To hear them admit to denying blackboard suddenly became a very different story, because the one we've been planning on for a long time is a blackboard inside, so you just.  So that's the nature, which is one of.  Those here's the second one, this is, I don't know which one is wanting to some needs as one, so this is science is number one, but in a case, this is the best prestige insights.  Science, which is located in.  Yes, right.  Borders it's our worldwide worldwide.  institutions with a lot of.  NIH apologize in science and it is a National Institute of Health that is leading.  For documentary we apologize for structural racism.  So that we make him a little bit of don't know actually well after this is going to cover one, it says, you know.  My NIH long running efforts to diversity, have not been sufficient call into just resigned as the head of.  People in his thinking said to those individuals in the biomedical research and device and disadvantages to disrupt the racism i'm sorry.  So you had this advisory committee you acknowledge the prevalence of racism and anti blackness and scientific workforce and practical to the back of the paper that.  They focus on specific specifically of black people and one group such as Native Americans because of the conscience to want to do a legacy of slavery and.  Segregation so they're getting a bit have deep serious problems that they sort of turn a blind eye to for a long time, and you have to change, I just also want to say listen Native Americans.  Just as bad if not worse you're wiped off the face of the map in some parts of us like in the northeast practically eradicated many.  So it's not that the problem doesn't exist and that's.  What these folks.  to acknowledge that which has been on the receiving end of long moon.  In some ways it.  gave us all hope that things can likely change the momentum going.  And when you go into some young people like you all before us many of us to change because you're not onto the street last year, last year, two years ago.  In the middle of a pandemic, to the mind that we change things, but in changing things we have to be reckoned with how it still shows up.  Even in the Bible meeting ideas and beliefs, that we have some party have made their way into Objective instruments and Adam I know talk to y'all about that the with the scoring adjustments that are needed for medical instruments people of color have difficulties.  With soap dispensers brings out equal to a place where it is so expensive sticking and honor the force that they decide to turn on in response to light bulbs and obfuscated doesn't work so what's the blackboard.  I mean things like that that's a simple one, but there are many more other problems that have to do with our heart rates and all of that.  would have significant consequences, you know the ox ox meters that were used at the beginning of the pandemic three times as likely to miss more levels of oxygen Asians and whites and the list goes on.  So, in the next class.  we're going to finish the conversation about how science has been Susan how it shows up in contemporary institutions and then we're going to reboot in on education and here's why i'm honing in on a fish, I know y'all are all science majors and for them places.  Many people in the US are excluded from social economic prosperity.  which can lead and has led to widespread across their exclusion has been based largely on historical value judgments of marginalized groups and their criteria to improve or or or the democratic quality.  These inequities manifesting in wants to go gaps in achievement across the spectrum of social and economic activity, and you know know that some iniquity inequities of generative of others, so, for example, people can face disparities and access to education, to be.  have problems like down the line with employment with nutrition can have enough money for the finance looking going to authenticate don't have a good enough job, for example.  Problems with dignified housing events have gone through the roof today how many people are may stand to lose their homes and all of that, among other things right so even small enforce this parties which are enshrined in law and policy in here, and so on.  acting separately or in combination compounded over generations seemingly insurmountable barriers, so much so that many of us think it's.  too big to give zakat what is it possible to this mapping system remember month manchanda as opposed to help here, he got that woman well after she's done went to so many different people didn't get a good result right.  So in our next class before thinking about solutions will examine a bit more closely on racism manifests in education.  In general, and in science, in particular, before turning our attention to solutions and here's why the reason I think that doing so is important, is because schools have been able to find even in the Supreme Court essential sites of sites and social reproduction actually.  If out of nine justices actually agreed that schools are also instruments of democracy.  Schools that also they use the word nurses of democracy, in other words the very month and we have lafortune Sheraton this country can be nurtured in schools and it can persist over time, if we are careful about.  What schools have not necessarily been paying attention to that you can pay attention to test scores, and how children do.  And what economic benefit is going to be, to the exclusion of all of that so by excluding and not paying attention to it we've been exacerbating activities like you would not believe it, so we are also not only the site to social reproduction.  Socially reproducing equity in school that's just basic things about what happens in.  Public school, as opposed to private school in some pride in some public schools, depending on your zip code and all of that.  it's it's messed up and we have to understand homeless, because if we were to buy into the idea that the social context.  we're more social determinants where you live, where you educated if all of those things have impact on our state and our potential.  and potentially down the lane on an economic collectively the economical convenient have to pay attention to it, schools, not only exacerbate these problems, but they're also with guidance, they can fix it fix it so that will shows up in science.  would be a diverse cohort of people, it can fix it so that we all can live a better life, they can fix it so that yeah we need everybody to focus on what is happening in education, so that each sector that comes as a result of educated people can be better.  that's all I got for now I am looking forward to our next conversation To me, this is more about this is more about to.  Just do the work for the course is about you.  know in changing this I think you're considering taking this class, I know that this is the thing that has failed this group of us together.  To create the course to work together to continue to think about home change things and we're hoping that it will pass on to you the same kind of.  commitment to making the changes so that your children and your children's children can benefit all right, and one off my soapbox nine minutes, the sphere, thank you.  Alright, see you.

**Adam Labadorf (01:59:53.910):**  Next time.

**no speaker (01:59:56.790):** Okay.

