---
---

# Intro to Epigenetics

**Date:** 3/3/2022

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:01:04.110):**  Okay, everybody.  So the welcome and just want to make sure that everybody's on board with Melissa is not going to make it to she's got a doctor's appointment so she's not going to make it to the.  presentation today, but she asked me to make sure that you knew a little bit about the case studies and the expectations of the case studies, so this is a documented in perusal and.  If you want to take a look at how what you're supposed to be doing the general feedback everyone did some great background research now what she she's doing it she's going to give you feedback on the first case study before.  The break, which is three days but anyway, so, but hopefully hopefully she'll get that done and then after that what's going to happen is that.  Probably will be graded by one of the other people that are involved with the course with the other two great case studies, but if you have any questions about.  This you know you can still email or today and and just take a look, but this is a little bit about the feedback that you're going to get okay.  So today what we're going to really be doing is beginning a discussion on epigenetics now matt.  took a little bit of my lecture from last year and you've probably seen some of the same slides and epigenetics now, ultimately, the goal of course is to associate epigenetics with health.  And to start, though I going to use some of Melissa slides and just sort of give you a feeling for what she's thinking and.  It turns out that when you look at darwin's writings it's unfortunate but you could actually see within his right hand that he sort of takes for.  Granted that it's a man's world and sexual selection, which we all know a lot about turns out to be a contest subject that's taken from the male point of view.  Now this is the society in which he live, this is the site, in which he grew up.  And if we wanted to, we could find fault, without the presented differences between the name classification and we can attack him if we wish to do so.  And my point for you today and it's something that we've been talking about within the group of professors, is to sort of think about that for a second.  Should we be destroying darwin's reputation, because he took a very pro view of males view of the world and.  publish and it could be considered to be erroneous So if you look at this, there was a paper that came out only a couple weeks ago in science, which actually.  made this case that he was not looking at female choice, as well as he should have.  So this is the paper that came out and sciences is from there is Victorian ideas about women affected his ability to see how influential made choice, especially from the female side could be.  So in this particular paper and it turns out that one of the authors of the paper was a professor here, and the other author was a.  The advisor for Karen walk into, who is a professor here, so these are people we know we know that work very well and they bent a lot of time and trying to tell us how.  did things wrong research support simon's conjecture that songs perfumes and intricate intricate dances evolved because they help secure mating partners.  And yet, so we can destroy it, we can have to struggle we can attack.  All right now it's interesting and you can look at the reason, this is a figure for the paper of how.  He was looking at the male looking at the beautiful male and the female chooses the mouth, but now we know that there's a lot of interaction between the male and the female no problem.  Now, here is my point of whether or not we should be looking at cases like this and even bringing them up now last week image.  There was a book review and the book review was called the book was called the cultural the extreme north a cultural history and what this was was a book that actually.  looked at how the Aryan race was northern latitude developed so white people became superior right you got it all right.  So I read the book review it's only little blurb in nature in nature, I want you to take a look at this and if you guys don't mind i'd like to you know get opinions as we go around so.  i'm going to read it to you and then amanda you're going to tell me what we should do right in the United States, William Warren first president, the Boston university i'm sure you've heard of warrant hours, this should not be a surprise to you.  In Massachusetts described how man was created the audit paradise with the tree of life at the North Pole.  And he goes on to be critical of these you genesis well you're Warren our President, what do you think we should do we.  need to be you right, I mean there were a lot of people at Harvard that like thought stuff like that Stanford right like we talked about this whole time um I mean of course it's a bit disappointing because i'm like.  Right in the same way that you know i've heard of some things that like john silberman said, and we like this buildings have him around right so like.  it's tough, I mean, I think this is different than Darwin and his talk, you know discussion about what about sex and gender, because I think this was.  A bit further, I think, when you look at the views of the time, and like where people are relative to that like I think dharma was like kind of in line with the views right at this time, I think.  It was a bit further to one extreme all right now, you know this is how I was thinking.  So I got you know I got oh my God that's what you're worried, so what I did, of course, was send a email right away was like you know Friday Friday night or something like that and I sent an email to Melissa and to add.  To the Dean, who is over there and I was thinking my camera was okay it's time to rename Warren towers mlk towers out here, so I did that and then what happened was Adam decided to do what we probably should always, though.  He went to look at the book that Warren William our road and he sent us back a little bit of a blurb and when you read it, it comes out as the poly jeannie of race has a present know respectable support, even the author of the latest the PAPs out best of the works on the.  Pretty pretty adamant hypothesis remarks the purell origin of mankind is a doctrine now almost entirely superseded.  So when you go, and this was a nature that they actually had the denigrating our first president of Boston university, but when you go and look up the book.  It actually gives you a completely different impression of what was being said so, I just want to point out that this is a topic we should be looking at.  At one point is out so many of the work that we've been presenting has a negative gives you a negative impression of these people and i'm not so sure that we should be doing that, so it was interesting we'll move on okay so.  This is something that's interesting race as a moving target and This again is something to think about.  What we're looking at with the gen X movement is that at one time it was probably southern Europeans, it was Jews was Chinese and then what happens is as they are actually being basically targeted, as it says here that they forget.  You forget and that said different groups were once excluded once it was wasn't good when finally induced a developed collective inclusive amnesia.  So we all were at one time, targeted and we should remember that and it's very, very upsetting that our society doesn't do that profitably.  and especially what is now coming back to science so it's science what's happening is that we have to really be very careful.  of how we are presenting the ideas that we have looked at as Adam has so nicely done with the with economics and we've touched on many examples where there were problems.  there's nothing more than a couple calls me father and and and Watson, the Presidents of Stanford middlebury college etc and there's so many other problems out there, but we have to be aware of where our shortcomings could be.  Right now, and this is an important sort of thought, something to think about we are responsible with scientists.  misconceptions that were propagated for the when they enter the eugenics areas enable the conducting unethical science over the world.  And we want to look at that a little bit more carefully than I hope we have time to do that.  So from the treatment of bartman to Nazi Germany to the tuskegee incident for sterilizations These are all things that were actually a.  A targeted population that was persecuted because of supposedly racial differences, so we are scientists do have to be extremely careful.  He believes that can be rationalized become innumerable So what we want to do is, I want to take a minute to talk about a little bit of what Adam was talking about last time with the intelligence just for a second.  The misconceptions about race and biology from sciences history of very difficult to correct all right now.  I know that you guys are not as familiar with the sky Charles Murray, and I have a lot more on it, but I just want to take a couple minutes to talk about it.  He wrote that bell curve in 1994 it did it with amanda and Charles charleston and it was.  It was really right away attacks, it was just a people just said, how can you do this and and the interesting thing is, is that he is still doing it have anybody heard of this pad podcast by a guy named Sam Harris.  it's a very popular podcasts that a few months ago, he was on Murray was being you know basically idolized on this particular podcast and in 2020 he wrote another book.  Saving some of these things, and I want to show you a little bit now, this is a very smooth talking that it's a man that worked for the American married.  American Heritage Foundation and he wrote the book and he used the science that you wanted to use a supported by the draper organization a.  very biased racist group that wants to support these conventions.  And it became something that so many people looked at carefully and I want you to take a look at that this this is from the bell curve, please Matthew going to ask you what you think okay.  And I want you to tell me what you would think about Murray, in general, and what will you would do if you heard him speak in 2000 well, let me go on.  IQ differences between the races were mostly innate and also tractable Now I want, I have an interview he did on a vhs tape.  Which is possible to show in this room, but it's not impossible because I just took a look, and I used to bring in rolling my tv's with a vcr it's sitting there.  The same one that i've used for 20 years is sitting out there and I don't want to do it right now but I might bring it in to show you the interview with Marty.  And he's on a show that's called nightline with a guy named Ted koppel and couples very sweet very nice talks, yes, and then they bring in a guy from princeton to argue against them.  And at the very end of the show Murray basically says there's a disproportionate amount of poor genes in the lower classes.  He says that makes it clear that that's a goal, and he doesn't sitting there like Oh yes, yes, that is correct and coupled sits there, and he listens.  he listens carefully, it says oh wonderful you know I mean oh that's interesting Sam Harris does that, right now, I want to for a second.  That I can get myself weird really weird little stuff a few years before that they had a guy come on to Ted koppel show nightline.  and His name was bird Captain ERIs he was a baseball executive and Murray said, let me get this straight that people who are black aren't as bright as people who are white and we have to be very careful with what he says.  Besides, women, besides men in black and white women to show show programs like welfare or early education intervention ought to be scrapped you don't do head start headstart is going to give money to people that can't be change.  This is where a systemic racism comes into play, because not only were they fruitless but because they encouraged women with low IQ the wrong women because this to have more children.  These findings were presented as good news, why should intellectual achievement, be considered the hallmark of success.  Why should black people interpret this neutral data as a statement of they're inferior aria get this know that authors maintain With breathtaking condescension.  They will develop their own alternative sources of esteem, they might for example console themselves with their athletic dominance, this is this guide Murray, who is listened to by half of this country, as the scientist who we should be looking at and looking up to.  So Ted koppel add some on the back and the other guy doesn't quite look as polished let me show you.  A two minute film.  showing you what kapil did a few years before this guy for Kevin Harris, now the film was Ken burns film on baseball, but a lot of that had to do with racism.  And let's show you this.

**Meghana (00:18:36.780):**  I know I think you're sharing your screen.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:18:40.620):**  sees me.

**Meghana (00:18:41.640):**  I don't think you're sharing a screen on zoom.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:18:44.010):**  I gotta get did you see any of that yet.

**Meghana (00:18:46.590):**  No, no.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:18:47.910):**  Well, no, no, I, but I have to, I have to get to the film.  I know I know I stopped doing the screen hold on.  Please let me know if.  That I do lose you.  I want to make sure that you do see these things, and you see the screen now with the.  Frequently Asked Questions are you see that.

**Meghana (00:19:15.390):**  yeah it has been now.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:19:16.410):**  yeah so that know what I wanted to do was.  I intentionally stop sharing.  Let me show you camping heiress.  watch this.  riverwalk managers or general managers or owners well there's a couple their habits and black managers, but I really can't answer that question directly the other day, I can say is that.  You have to pay your dues when they become a manager generally, you have to go to finally stop very much bay and Bob and some of the.  better known black players and then they would get into other fields, and they get pretty good living in that way, there you know when you're our seniors that are great for conversion so.  There are a lot of black players are a lot of the brain like baseball men.  Who were dearly love to be a managerial positions and this one really asking is the peeling away a little bit just tell me why do you think is the sale that much prejudice and this will.  Now I don't mean expressiveness I totally believe that they may not have some of the necessities to be let's say a field manager, or perhaps.  A general manager he really believe that well I don't say that they're all of them, but they certainly are short how many bags, do you have i'm the patient, the other black it say I go to that sounds like the same garbage reading for years ago players when.  They.  are playing football player, the needs of that really sounds like garbage.  it's not it's not very scalable because I play that on college senior Center fielders black and then backfill that's.  Why, he was a fullback with black never know the difference of black or white, we were teammates so it just might need it, they they wire our black men black men sweaters they don't have the buoyancy or a registry, or they don't have access to it.  The next day camp and I was responding.  To that that and that's amazing 70% of the players and here's my point when he interviewed this was 1989 sort of the 40 year anniversary Jackie Robinson integrating baseball and then, when he goes ahead, and it to boost the guy Murray, who says exactly the same thing.  He would sit treat some oh gee and it was terrible so we get a chance i'll show it to you i'll show you that as a.  As something to think about okay i'm going back I stopped sharing for a SEC i'm going back to the PowerPoint.  Maybe I can do it just by sharing the screen again let's do this, let me know if you don't see this if it works at that should be able to pull this up.  There we go okay so that's my spiel for today on terms of.  Racial justice.  Now we get back to business.  OK, so the dedication today is a man named Ernest ever just and look he had some ideas that were the first bits and pieces of what will think of that as as epigenetics.  He was a prominent embryologist he did come up with some ideas he was also a poet, and a writer, he was a very brave man and yet he never was able to get the academic.  sort of.  recognition that he needed So how do organisms, develop and how do these different cell types now here's the thing about what we know.  We know that when you looked at gene theory and Morgan, it was very clear everything came from within the nucleus.  And what was looking at what what just was looking at was that maybe it's not just the nucleus, that everything comes from the cytoplasm.  So, for how for how could the genes be responsible for differentiation if they are all the same in every cell unless the geneticists assume that the genes are.  voted, we cannot understand how the problem of differentiation can be solved by the gene theory of every entity so.  He he's wrong, to the extent that he doesn't accept the idea that DNA is regulating how things develop.  So he began his theory which was called the genetic restrictions here, so the important molecules inside of.  A side of plastic agents, which, with the help of genes are free to go about the vital task of getting the various cell types that particular properties.  gnc thought play a secondary role of evolving this one that fact and in the end, he doesn't get the recognition.  He doesn't get the type of job that will be able to use and create the credibility, a big part of why just did not further develop this theory was that he could get employment that a research institution.  And he never really you know made that kind of an impact, but epigenetics we now know, is a factor and i'm just curious does anybody want to tell me what they know about epigenetics anything.  That at all about how this applies, you might know more so we'll get we'll get to that and we'll get the show some of the same little videos so he was.  Alright, so, if you look at it walk in theory is the genes the just theory is looking at our.  we're looking at the cytoplasm being factors that determine cell differentiation and epigenetics basically tells us both.  That its genes and then upon that you're going to have the environment, which is actually going to lead to the expression of the genes alright, so when I say gene expression.  i'm looking at this particular figure, and this is not a surprise to you and you all know a little bit about our lot about our DNA replicates I do want to show you a picture to about how this plays out, and I think it's interesting to think about the.  way this works so let's stop this for a second.  Make sure that you still can see me please.  And let's just take a look at the DNA for a SEC, there are three little short videos that you might have seen before.  So I want you to think about this, because you know about it, and I just want to look at the complications.

**no speaker (00:27:39.090):** Good. stuff. or a race needs to be activated by a. Factor all activated. activate activated and find. The enhancer region. activate those buttons to the hearts of each word molecules to initiate transcription.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:28:25.020):**  another type of transcription factor, or the presser inhibits the activation transcription.  redresses and act in different ways, so progressive buy to buy new site actuators that prevent activated for buying into DNA.

**no speaker (00:28:46.050):** Some interview with a molecular interaction activated this and they are in a liberal as. An active interest versus act by affecting credited structure. These reverses and also the protein structures in Tokyo. or not today transcription. Or is it activates. Section.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:29:17.700):**  And maybe genes in those regions available transportation, so my point is there's a lot going on it's not just the g's if you can environmentally affect the way and answer a promoter is going to work you are going to alter the effect of the genome and how that's all going to play out.  let's take a look at this one for a second.  This is transcription also sure.  Sure, is extraordinary.  How a Civil Code is turning.  If you can learn about the factories assembly, the start of the cheap.  A genius and Leah like the piano instruction stretching away for that.  Is that is triggered trigger the first phase of the process reading off the information that will be needed to make the party.  Everything is ready to roll 321 go to.  The loo molecule bracing along the DNA is reaching.  Its unzip and relax then copying, what are the two strands.  The young shane sneaking up on the top is a copy of the genetic message and it's made for clothes chemical cousin didn't called already.  The building blocks today, Dr the edge of the take home.  They have matched to the in a letter by letter to copy the a's sees teas and cheese, but then she.  The only difference is that in your in a copy the letter T is replaced with a close game related building block nervous you.  you're watching this process called transcription in real time is happening right now in almost every cell in your body.  Okay, so.  You have this issue that the issue is that.  Things can go wrong things can happen and we can get mutations and obviously that's important.  And if you look at this let's go back to the PowerPoint.  So just think about it for a second and I My point is that when you have to turn genes on and off, it has to happen, a lot.  You can't have your arm grow and liver you can't have your eye for me here well the genes of the same virtually every cell.  And the point being that errors are going to be made and without errors, we would not be here because you wouldn't be able to have evolution and that's what allows us to change.  In terms of different environmental conditions alright, so you have transcription you have translation you guys know all about that.  And we're looking at RNA, and this is basically just simply the transcription and translation and then you eventually get proteins, etc, etc.  Okay, so this is what gene expression is all that, but it goes a little bit further than that it's again RNA abundance translation function protein abundance, etc.  And we're looking then at, for instance, in this case you're looking at CES acting trans sequences promoters or enhancers.  And they bind to the trans acting factors and then you actually have again over here what you're looking at as a collective Ada and over here a Co repressed and that becomes more complex okay.  Then, surely you're going to eventually see how the genome is transcribed and how it's going to be expressed, so it is epigenetics come into play.  And it is something that's very interesting that there are environmental effects that could attach either methyl groups or settle groups to the DNA and turn off in an answer turn on and ahead, Sir, and to show you how that plays out, I want to.  I want to show you a little film.

**no speaker (00:34:24.570):** And let's do this. let's memory memories. This is the one. Okay.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:34:37.560):**  So this is to me a very good description of what epigenetics is all about it turns out that epigenetics was discovered and looked at and very early on the effect that it has on actual parental care.  And and rats and let me show you this.  Memories that are great So what is this word we're in that, so this is a past.  LIFE I want to go here i'll just tell.  These total war is a way to test.  It and see.  You up the deck about halfway through this murky water so many cases.  They cannot see sure no place for that submerge than any surface of the water.  Now don't worry the MICE know how to swim so when they have to do is learn the platform is and violent.  They practice for just 90 seconds, at a time or two times a day and pretty soon they figure it out and once they get ahead of it, they always remember rarely find the safe haven.  yeah learn route side is the toxic protein that destroys brain cells.  And back in the water, the MICE forget where the platform is that has to be rescued.  girl she's brilliant it's basically function properly, no, no.  it's about action figures changing still cannot find it really is impaired in their their cognitive function.  So solid wanted to find out could those last memories be restored so after they're Nice and dry advice get a true.  suits not a certain flavor.  experiment test study for many years, but never really understood it's called environmental enrichment.  to grow there.  are lots of toys how's the.  companions then just somehow they are there because father.  after just a short vacation just saw inputs from box back in the water and here's the supplements amazing they swim straight to the platform.  So after she makes the world go back into the water is.  on the right path much faster.  So now everybody's got their memories, but what's actually happening inside their brain cells.  is possible in the work of neuroscientist David sweat his hobbies painting abstract images of your brain cells T cells and it's like.  The work that's going on laboratory or science or house, the most interesting thing in the world, so that's what the pain.  sweat lost his mother to all timers and then I was trying to figure out new ways understanding our brain cells create networks is search stars deep inside neurons were long strands of DNA tiny coiled around a group of proteins called histones.  As if you were relying solely on the school.  systems are going to school and a truck around systems like direct trip around the school.  analyzing brain cells from normal mice sweat discovered that when DNA is wrapped it around the histones jeans for him so when they do get a sense of genes involved in working memory are exposed in this will show.  It is that happen the brain cells appears in a war and stronger connections with each other.  This was a new pathway into the creation memories that had never been understood before, when you have a new process like that you can think of the currently with different ways to go about attacking the roots function.  That get him on tape leeway saw that also discovered some new devices say Disney world seem to have sparked the same process, even in every pair grains.  They are teenagers also loosened up and making memory choose more active and somehow, even though they've lost a significant number of neurons this was helping yourself make new connections, the century wire remaining neurons so your brains can work.  found that, even though this bias, have given it to ourselves to be more effective, or the processes are that are happening to to allow us to live in water and that's very.  Sad, because we understand that, then we went into one day, maybe it's possible to have a pill, that we can take and now have this magical.  effect.  appeal that you bring back memories, well, it may not be so farfetch.  sweats like there's always a group of experimental drugs called H jak inhibitors the chance, for instance, that are involved in this thing up DNA and brain cells.  And then the drugs are given to the world bice they learn and remember better suicide excited to see if they would have any effect on her mice with damaged brain cells.  She took a new group of the devil mice and gave them the experimental drugs and within a short time, they also remember how to swim straight to the platform, we found that they say images drastically improved.  come about and realize that what did you think I will only.  interest what legalization is that memories can be stored apparently walls and then regain by taking my house and either giving a rich environment or a certain drugs she can show those were covered some of those Members.  No way to know whether these new discoveries will ever applied to humans or two treatments for memory this works.  Now there are tantalizing inside, then a new direction for more research into the mysteries of now, this is such a powerful and it's such a lot of significance because it affects the most fundamental aspects of our power deafness and.  Any events is a sample of these experiments which is pretty amazing the tell us what's this Eric landed, he was just fired your soul.  In situations like you hope.  They all take right now there's a lot there and I want to go over Matthew Do you remember any of this.  Okay now this see what the association is between what they showing you in this course.  Is that let's imagine that there are environmental effects that all do the glucose coin receptors and the stress response.  let's imagine you're raised in poverty let's imagine you're facing systemic racism.  Then, if you do that and environmentally induced stress leads to severe health issues, then we've got something going on here, and these are epigenetic effects.  Now, so it becomes important to understand how the epigenetics play out now there are two major ways it works out.  If you have a methyl group that attaches to the DNA it basically saying that it will wrap the DNA around the histones very tightly.  And it stops the expression of the genes if, on the other hand, you have a settle group.  That actually loose it or you look at it, as it loosens the DNA wrapped around the stones and that the genes can be expressed.  So if you are bringing in these two molecules it has an incredible effect on the way in which, in our case, what we're looking at the glucose receptor is going to respond now.  It turns out that she went into something else, which is a double negative and a drive everybody crazy an age deck emitter okay now please just listen for a second a histone D a set of LACE.  she's giving it a stone DSL is in it better now let's think about the term a stone the settlers first.  So if you have a celebration and that's an environmental and social group that is going to turn the gene on.  So it's going to have a an effect of doing that, but if it's a decentralized an H stack is stone these satellites, it turns off the simulation turns off the James wraps tightly around the is.  What she gave it was a inhibitor to that is done via satellites.  Therefore, instead of turning it off, it will turn it back on.  Now, can we do that with a drug on stress I don't know now here is the real issue about epigenetics.  And I think what you're going to have a lot more of the stress response, but let us imagine that Matthew is raised in a very stressful environment.  Let us imagine that he has been faced with so much of the stress his health is suffering sorry and that what's going to happen is that he's going to have children.  Now normally when we're taking a look at epigenetics everything is reset, but there is evidence, now that it might not be so that your children might actually inherit the actual environmentally induced effects on your genome, that they will have because of what you will experience.  And then your children's children will actually have that effect.  And that is the real issue that we have to deal with, to show you what I mean a little bit about that i've got another little film and it has to do in this case.  mice.  Now I want to just that issue for a second if you don't mind, let me ask the question.  Does this mean anything to people what we're talking about i'm showing you examples with mice i'm showing you examples of.  Stress in a in a big tub of water, where they're finding a little platform now, this is something that is very important as scientists, how can we project, the results that we have the understanding that we develop to humans, what do you think.

**no speaker (00:47:07.980):** Well, I feel like there's definitely can have. Similar effects and other mammals and then it gets to that point. Clinical. While it might not seem super relevant right now.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:47:36.840):**  Okay Matthew yeah so.

**no speaker (00:47:39.450):** So.

**Frederick E Wasserman (00:47:41.520):**  there's like the implications of if it does well that's sort of like generational trauma due to its institutionalized racism will cause like these populations which can be it is there, and every we inherited this like gives more credence to.  That like the way you should watch it it's genetically.  We should would like some.  So here's the thing we're going to talk about stress and the stress caused by poverty was bye.  systemic racism, but I do think that it has to be that association now Melissa found an article last week.  That dealt, and I have it in the PowerPoint but Rwanda people during this terrible wars, they were looking at pregnant women.  and comparing those pregnant women from the country that actually experienced war two ones that were outside.  And they looked at the indication for epigenetics to see what was going on.  It doesn't really get to the point of being able to tell us whether or not those that experience we're going to pass it down to their children.  and their children are going to have that and it see the issue really becomes one of let's say you had a somebody that experience more.  stressed out and and has the epigenetics you don't know if they're going to have a difficult time, raising their children and that's why the children get it.  And it turns out, there are some experiments with mice will can play with but i'm not sure how easy it's going to be working with people.  On this so Jesse you're right, I mean you're absolutely right, we could try to do this with trials and and see what plays out.  But it's going to be extremely difficult, with people and it's something that we have to be careful how much we can extrapolate to humans and that's really important.  And, but, but I think I think it's still an interesting thing to look at Now I want to show you this little film, which is again on epigenetics.  and takes a look at the possibility that what you eat and how that affects you will be passed on to your children and your children's children again it's a nice little film.  I forgive me for my little films my Matthew knows we'd like film.  Right.  Oh that's not it that's not as you hold on hold on.  There you go.  You go back and start at three minutes on this.  The they're talking about twins and it's interesting actually show you a little bit about the twin studies to and they do end this with a medical.  sort of analysis is really understood what you should wait for sentence.  I have been told that I am a race for.  me.  Again it's not uncommon for 20 bucks to get a trip disease, while the other leg hotel that doesn't.  happen to people, so the so.  well.  May.  identical as a raincoat.  Despite the differences in are colored socks.  This is Duke university's Brady Jersey.  Already I see here you have schema Nice and fat what have you done this class well these animals are actually genetically identical there's that one to this game that's correct because these are huge they're here, I can wait.  So if you take this is, you can barely walk they can't walk too much they're going to be running them very far so there's about 6363 grams let's look at the other one.  Just halfway right this gets even more serious when you realize that is identical wise both have a particular gene called a ui but in a yellow mouse essays on all the time, causing obesity.  For the same mouse exercise.  Atkins.  know the time Kevin tag or carbon and nitrogen called a metal as a fixed to the region shutting it down.  Millions of times I hear.  Some by methods attached your genes directly hating their function.  Whether it is around the proteins called histones parameters jeans or a tight news and it controls and expression.  Just think methylation and his own patterns exists in every so constitutive source second gina.  pete beach to.  me to that he literally translates into just meaning of love the Channel So if you would think, for example, of the genome is being like a computer the hardware of the computer the genome would be like the software that tells the computer when work, how it work and how much.  In fact, they see everything on the tells ourselves what sort of salvation skin hair part you see all these cells have the same channel but they're me he knows silencio needed to make sales different for.  epigenetic instructions pass on sales of our but they're not necessarily permit researchers can change, especially during critical periods, but puberty for greatness.  turtles Meister feel How does that mean those are the most.  Diverse thing grandma's instead of that you're pregnant mothers are divergent to form the tags that can turn genes on.  And that's amazing.  And I think you can see that we dramatically shifted the code color fan we get many, many more brown animals matters because your color is a tracer is an indicator that's correct, of the fact that you have trouble setting that's right.  This energetic shakes was all sort of parody by the next generation of ice, regardless of what their mothers.  And when an environmental toxin was added to the day, instead of nutrients more male babies were born dude to fat and sick like they were.  SEC, this is profound implications for our House, it does for human health, if there are genes like this and humans and he said what you eat can affect your future generations.  So you're not only what you eat essentially what your mother eight and possibly even with your grandparents that is so many issues to do this experiment.  When you have these bikes and they're genetically identical on purpose So who is your perfect line of you well, then we look for identical humans, which are done.  And that brings us to be smarter show Spanish 25 they participated in a groundbreaking study material.  is going to show just how identical beverages, they are or are.  Like because this case I will have the same disease and then use that as a higher rates of the organization says, but it's not really sure that we don't have it because, ours is as part of the story.  Something that's real wages and Spanish is isn't it it's.  So lovely to see you.  may have heard the differences.  He has to go like yourselves from 40 pairs of identical twins H three 274.  be a little more is process of designing a sentence, it was like whiskey sure, hence da the master moshi moshi.  moshi next researchers amplified fragments of DNA into the cheese themselves became detector.  So they had to turn off any genetical appear as dark pink bands Joe.  knows what happens when the chips are the pair tracks overall actual.  Results are far from something.  Especially when compared to the energy levels of two sets of twins that different age.  here on the left is the overlap, the GA a six year old copier carl's.  The yellow square their gene expression because identical.  On the right is the DNA of a 66 year old on the vehicle to.  It contrasts with numbers.  there any chance to read.  This okay That was my point, and so you know how does this relate to us but we're doing this class again it comes back to the fact that if you are.  constantly under pressure, you constantly facing systemic racism you're going to have something happened to your genome and it's not going to be good.  Especially if that's been passed on and i've got I got to say, this is what i've been asked to do is to show you what epigenetics is about there's going to be a lot more on that later on, so let me just go back to the PowerPoint again.  And just fill you in on few other things because again it's not I know i'm not.  necessarily going to directly related to what what we're going to eventually do, but I think it's still important alright so here are and.  If you do mind if I do call on you go to the back, is that OK, if that you know just smoke fun alright, so what you're looking at here are an methyl group and a settled group.  So the method group turns off the functioning of the Jane but, in the same way in a subtle group can turn on something that actually leads to something negative.  So it's not like just methyl groups are going to be necessarily deleterious the methyl groups can be okay, they can turn something off that you want turned off.  Alright, so what we have as a sort of a general way of looking at that, if this histone is settled nation.  tends to promote the gene activity that's the cell group of the Unattached is still methylation and DNA methylation tend to an imaging activity.  And if you want to go further, which will be what will we do with my part of the lecture on Tuesday, when we come back i'm going to be discussing rats.  And i'm going to be looking at how being raised by a list nurturing mother tends to lead to more methyl groups and that all spring that is born to that met less nurturing mother is going to be a less mercury mother herself.  And we can see how that perpetuates itself so it's attached to the promoting region of the quote unquote receptivity and I hope I have enough time to talk about that a little bit more today.  So these methods do is block access by the transcription factors that turning on as a result, fuel receptors are produced.  And of course we're talking very much about the stress response when we talk about other things as well.  So this was size work she's over in MIT and only about a month or so ago, I heard a talk by her, and you know, in other words she did the work is really very interesting.  This describes the work that we just saw are, the more smarter maze is that sort of bath that you saw where the animal was placed in.  And look she's looking at it from the viewpoint of how do you help people with alzheimer's disease and could you imagine, one day, developing a pill, that is an H deck in emitter.  is still the SL a's turns it off, then it inhibitor and turns it back on and so it's it's an interesting case all right now.  let's take a just, this is a good little just just basic figure.  And here's a method group here's a phosphate group here is a settle group here is stones and obviously all of this comes into play and actually what the EPI genome, is going to be like.  Now I want to point out something again I mentioned it earlier that if you have a particular part of the body at fertilization you're not going to want every cell in your body working to make an arm.  or a leg or an eye or any and so you've got to be able to turn off those jeans or turn them on when you want to do so, so this is what we're looking at here, so, if you look at this DNA methylation.  method groups are attached directly to the side to side as a basis and it's attached to the CG basis and.  In DNA and generally is silence nearby jeans removal of these marks occurs during fertilization, will you want some particular part of the body to actually be developing.  So if you take this chest fit every every information method groups of stripped from the original DNA paternal DNA and naturalization is reset for development.  So I mean this happens all the time it's not a shock it's not a surprise that we're dealing with debbie genetics, it is part of the actual way that every day just.  actually said there is environmental effects on our genome.  It is also turned off during fetal development so genome wide the methylation occurs again during the development of primordial sex sells.  And again perinatal development before and after birth diet and stress may contribute to further the methylation of genes which may have an influence our behavior.  Yes, please so it's always from like they're always stripped from internal DNA, so the methylation only like you only get your mother's like you're gonna get you're gonna get both that's and that's The thing that I found most interesting was that.  That i'll give you a heads up on where where it goes, so what this one scientist MSA is that she actually had a very stressful situation for the MICE really stressful.  And then she had the mother and if the mother raised the young and had around young they were going to show the same kind of methylation that's.  What she then, and this is this is key, she then took the father and if she was if he was going to have any influence in his method is the method you know they took the father and they made it him to a mother that never was stressed.  So she's not going to do anything and correctly with her offspring and other words.  What i'm suggesting is that her methylation effects are going to affect the other, but the key is the father to so that this father is now made it to a mother that has no stress those offspring show the same stress that the father had.  And, and then she looks at the little segments of the the the RNA that actually wasn't so we'll talk about that we show you the paper.  But, but so don't I didn't mean to imply that it's only the father it's just amazing to me that it is the fall because normally, you would think that that was reset at birth good question right now.  There are writers, they attached to chemical mocks their readers which actually bind to these marks and influence need expression.  There are erasers that remove the Marks and then I love the term this stone these satellites is which are going to.  Basically, prevent the settle groups working there for turning off the functioning of the gene well, then you go ahead and hit that and I love it it's the most confusing thing, and all of this whole stuff is still the central ace inhibitor but it's beautiful okay now.  What I want to do and I show this in behavior is that there is a scientist named Jay bradner.  And he hit this is from one of his papers and it's really nice because it sort of gives you a feeling of how the method groups here the set of groups here, and this turns out to be and again it's just a little beyond what we're what we're usually interested in here it's about cancer.  So we found the firefighter who was at this rare cancer, disease and it turns out that when you think about how cancer is being treated.  You have a few really heavy chemicals that are given to her, and you know my mom did i'm sure you've had family members, then you know these are these are awful ways of treating the disease.  Yet if you could figure out a way to do it through epigenetics and you can turn off the cancer by actually preventing the chemotherapy, then you may have a new whole method of dealing with cancer.  What he did in a mouse not he was able to treat patients was that he had a student or a postdoc who made a drug so here's what happens.  We R amp D for attaches to the cancer cell and makes it grow readers such a blt for buying these marks to influence gene expression.  So the cancer grows and grows what this student or this post up did his initials with jq what he did he blocks to be ID for for reaching the isetta groups on his thoughts and they could all the progression of the cancer.  Now, if you could do that and make that an effective means of treating cancer, without giving chemotherapy and these poisonous drugs to people which work.  But, which are incredibly credibly invasive, then we have going to be looking at a new, you know, a whole new world and, if this guy brand there has it has done so much work like this and I just want to show you that here is a.  Paper big paper that came out and science, you know, one of these review papers epigenetic plasticity and the hallmarks of cancer.  So I have it in the PowerPoint but epigenetics publicity and the hallmarks of cancer genetic environmental or metabolic gets us going to do, overly restrictive overly permissive.  epigenetic landscapes that contribute to pathogenesis of cancer and other diseases restrictive chromatin states may prevent appropriate induction of tumor suppressor programs or block differentiation it's.  Again in the other course I have that three or four papers that it literally review papers looking at this, but that's cancer as a different story alright next.  identical twins alright now here is something it's an epigenetic phenomena, and this is tangential to everything, but I find that very, very interesting.  You each of you might have an identical twin at birth.  That you never knew about.  that's pretty crazy right.  So recently, and this is a paper from.  What they discovered was that every identical twin has the same signature EPI genetic signature that they had a identical twin or add an identical twin.  So identical twins carrier persistent genetic signature of early genome programming.  Using blood and chic so samples researcher scan the EPI genomes and more than 3000 identical twins as well as well as a parable number of fraternal twins and some twins parents.  They looked at forum with as a different places on each person's gino and Lo and behold, they found 800 locations that had differences in methylation That said, identical twins apart from everyone else.  So what is interesting is that you might have had an identical twin and they call that a ghost twin did you guys know this.  So you go get some tested find out if you actually had a twin in your now.  Right so but that's that's that's interesting I think that's really interesting.  So identical twins share a common signature twin good not in their DNA, but on the DNA the epigenetics.  The signature is part of the epigenome over the chemical markets adopt any spots along the DNA influence the activity of jeans without altering the sequences identical twins everywhere largely share a specific set of these blocks that persistent birth to a child okay now.  Next, this is where we will be looking at a little bit and there were people raised in basically Allen during the war, and they would deprive the food that was started.  And in this particular case, this slide shows that those individuals that suffered during the war and they had controlled groups actually are affecting the.  The genome, with the epigenome and they might have had an individual who would then therefore give birth to somebody with a high birth, I have with obesity and you know again it's an epigenetic effect.  it's very nice little radio lab show, if you want to look at that in more detail that's it's curious okay now.  So oh yeah I should show I do want to show you that one other little thing about the glucose receptor, let me just get that.  Okay.  Now tell me if you guys don't see this on zoom I want to make sure that you can.  I found this to be nice interesting little video.  And it may take us away, but I hope.  Okay, wait, I want to go back.  This is crazy.  signals from our environment, our most often the first detected by the brain when someone is reading a stress response is initiated by their reaction to environmental stable.  But many signals don't stop here.  The central received by the brain can be passed on to many types of cells to have the bottom.  Line widespread fx.  Signals get centered around the body by traveling through the system or bloodstream going from sells itself.  You could think of the cells so.  Signals going or initiating new ones in response to the barn.  wants to signaling molecule mall from the bus reaches a cell and.  The signal is passed into the cell.  Like a miniature mousetrap a missile is filled with complex contractions call the protein or bump into each other to keep the signal going until it reaches its target.  In this case, it's an introduction of yet another signaling molecule that will get released into the bloodstream Duncan other cell types and cause them to react in a variety of ways.  The signal passing machinery inside the cell can look at work very different depending on the intended effect.  Do you think the recording coin and quarterly see the signal and cascade that results in the release of energy molecules.  want slavery, they are sent on their way by the bloodstream to ourselves and another area of the body.  What this tiny domino effect is triggered inside cells so amazing things can happen or.  Other signaling cascades trigger during the stress response, result in a variety of physical reactions this signaling molecule can relax or contract different time.  And do anything didn't do anything muscle so.  When it reaches the scan the signal dogs are muscle cells attached to your body hair.  The tiny muscle is similar to contract racing the hair.  The signal also Doc some cells wrapped around the sweat plan which contract to squeezing swept under the skin surface.  In the lungs the signaling molecule docs on muscle cells wrapped around brooke shields, but these cells relax instead of contract to allow more oxygen into the blood.  Because the protein machinery inside each kind of muscle cell is different, this single type of signaling molecule could cause both relaxation.  And contraction.  Many signaling molecules work this way or.  Wireless signal beaches are horrible dogs on beating ourselves their responses to be faster.  Pressure goes up and the signaling molecule is Russia to sell more cell types around the life.  Constantly and in concert cells must send and receive a very other signals cell communication is vital to keeping the body alive.  Okay, so the point here is that with stress response to cortisol you can increase the level of stress, but then you've got to be able to alleviate it.  and apparently the epigenetic effect is to prevent that from happening and what that will eventually do is cause some serious health issues.  So that's where we go with what we're going to be thinking about okay now, I have one more topic to cover and that, so I was basically told to do so i'm going to do that here and going to.  lead us into this is going to lead into what.  What Adam will cover in class next class.  There you go.

**no speaker (01:19:46.260):** Okay.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:19:55.650):**  I want to make sure you guys the zoom still see this.  hope.  Okay, do you mind if I if I asked you a couple questions okay all right, have you ever heard of the slavery hypothesis for hypertension.  Okay, let me give you an idea of what we're talking about it's been known in case of just in terms of medical treatment.  That, if you were black you're more likely to be subject to I protect and there's maybe some suppose the genetic reason for that.  And one of the reasons that they explained was because of the slavery hypothesis.  That you're going to be reading a paper about this, and this is something that made it into epigenetics some people think it does, some people don't really believe that.  And I want to just show you sort of how this plays out and just please help me with with this particular quote during a may 2007 oprah show.  The hemet us, by the way, did you guys know what he's doing now yeah he's running for Senator Pennsylvania, he moved to Pennsylvania to run for Senator and Okay, do you know why African Americans have five blood pressure.  Over oprah promptly reply that Africans who survived the slave trades middle passage with those who could own more salt in their bodies.  To which Dr Oz explain that's perfect.  What do you think.  How could that affect.  hypertension, in this case, what we're looking at.  high blood pressure.

**no speaker (01:21:53.220):** All.

**Frederick E Wasserman (01:21:55.200):**  Right now, what does the slave trade have to do with this, the three things..  Okay, take a look at this and sort of try to pick, one that makes sense to you because they don't make sense..  This is the guy just choose one we can talk today..  All right, the trauma of the slave trade itself so supposedly if you are being transported by ship and you have been coming from an environment..  Where there's always been a lack of soul, so you have a genetic predisposition to take more salt in if it's available and old it for longer..  And now you're on a slave both with supposedly again you're experiencing a deficiency it's sold and you're being faced to you know survive, and if you can survive and all the board soul you're going to be able to make it over the ocean and that terrible that terrible event..  So those are two of the things one is that supposedly people in Africa were coming from a place where there was a deficiency in salt and there was selection for people that could actually maintain fire soul levels..  The second thing is on the trip over if you were able to maintain more so, you were able to do well..  The third thing is if you're being raised as a slave it might be beneficial to have these generic effects, maybe epigenetic effects that actually would lead you to having the ability to maintain salt, when it was available because you're not going to get a lot of..  Years decades generations later those people with those genetic predisposition to almost sort..  Of hypertension and high blood pressure..  And as Dr said perfect oprah..  Now the question is, is it a fallacy now that's what you're going to be talking about in class next time..  So the purpose of this chapter, and this is the will Wilson a grim I think 1992 1990 when they first wrote about it..  The purpose, this is chapter, the view the physiological basis of that hypothesis that selective survival for the ability to conserve sold..  During African slavery period of western hemisphere history resulted in black population in the western hemisphere that had high blood pressure than the black population born in sub Saharan Africa..  So what they're suggesting to you in this story is that if you weren't through this process of being captured and slaved..  going through this period of time on the ship facing the conditions that you're living other in slavery, you have been selected for genes that would lead you to maintain salt and that had led to hypertension..  hypertension is characterized by low level activity of the ra da DC a system, they are a system that is directly related to salt intake..  The increased sensitivity of blood pressure to salt is also associated associated with an increased sensitivity to to the blood pressure, lowering the effects of diuretics okay nice right..  Look at the evidence..  So this is where we go off the deep end in trying to explain things that just aren't true..  Wilson and green published the only only a single peer review a scientific paper on the slavery, hypertension hypothesis in 1991..  As noted by Katherine and all the majority of the book on the slavery, hypertension, I presence is limited to the conference reports and non reviewed abstracts and book chapters..  coffin and whole also noted that, in the textbook published by frame Douglas the chapter on slavery, hypertension hypothesis that contains and citations..  For which are abstracts three of which are books, a book chapters, the Spice the limited data, the theory remains popular it is discuss the many hypertension tests textbook..  So at this point in time, what i'm obviously pushing towards is to for you to be skeptical of anything like this..  So lacking evidence, a review of this start with evidence shows that there was no thoughts or deficiency these parts of Africa..  So then, it started out with anything like that no to present the West Africans have a high incidence of hypertension..  Historical evidence does not support the hypothesis that details abroad slave ships were were cause mainly by conditions that IP could do some type of attention, such as salt depleting diseases..  Finally, the hypothesis that that heavily on evidence for the West Indies, which is that, rather than them for the United States, there is no evidence that diet, or the resulting adding of diseases demography..  A month slaves and American South were significantly different than those of other poor southerners..  So you are Adam is going to be discussing this much greater detail and you're going to be talking about it and you're going to be talking about it as the explanation as it relates to epigenetics..  And you know, this is the papers that have been written by decent scientists that actually talk about hyper epigenetics and hypertension here is one of them, the association between I bloodshot..  My blood pressure and DNA methylation i'm not sure if that is a paper that you're going to be asked to read and therefore next week you're going to discuss that in much greater detail..  Right, and that is where i've been asked to stop so you get out a little early all right so have a wonderful holiday, please stay safe, and you know we will and i'm sorry blister isn't here I miss a terrible, but I hope she's healthy okay everybody.

