---
---

# Discussion

**Date:** 4/26/2022

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:00:31.530):**  Hello everyone.  give it a minute or so is everybody joins.  Alright well i'm going to get us started was everybody doing on this fine Tuesday.

**no speaker (00:03:16.440):** chat open.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:03:35.100):**  Good all right.  On yeah thanks for asking.  Thanks for doing this virtually giving a.  National talk to science, education leaders at four on.  shifting our approach to science, education.  toward more of an asset based approach so i'm good been tinkering with the slides I feel like i'm a tinkerer always always looking to make them as good to perfect as they can be up to the moment so.  that's kind of the headspace that i'm in right now.  And speaking of science, education, I figured we'd start by kind of diving right into some things so yep alright so.  i'm going to share my screen.  quickly.  And then we're going to jump right into some breakout rooms, to get us started.  and ask you all to.  dig in and start playing with some data so.  We can use the chat we can you can unmute.  What do you notice about.  This data to make a bigger.  Ticket i'll see the data.  What do you notice what are we looking at what is this telling you.  anything.  Sure amanda.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:05:26.370):**  This looks like nutrition information for 37 different types of granola bars and it appears to be fairly detailed because you're talking about the brand.  The type and just like yeah all of the stuff that you would find on the back of the label of a granola bar.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:05:43.170):**  awesome thanks man that so yeah a bunch of different information telling us some things here in the middle about nutrition, but also brand some type and so.  What might we want to do with this data to to find out more like I can see, we can scroll over here with the texture and fruit and.  Like what might help us learn more about this data if we were to try to figure out something about these granola bars.  let's question anybody.  Alright, well, let me.  Did you have an idea.

**Anya Gupta (00:06:57.810):**  Oh yeah sorry i'm yeah i'm not too sure what your questions, asking, but I guess to find out more information, like you go to the brand's website like that kind of thing.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:07:07.470):**  So we could do like a deep dive we could go in and start researching about these different ones, and one of the things that we could do just within.  This platform is, we could graph it so if we were to graph it.  So right now I just pulled this in and i'm sharing this as a.  As a sorry I just took the dogs out before for walk before this and if I don't take the leash off of one of my dogs he kicks it so that it makes a loud noise, so that I realized I didn't take the collar off.  So what maybe we want to graph on here.  I think we don't often think of granola bars and nutrition information and graphing all together so granola bars are just being kind of a placeholder for what we might do with data.  But what might be something that we could look at based on all these different things.  And I hope everybody had lunch or granola bar data is going to make you hungry amanda.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:08:19.350):**  yeah I mean I guess it depends on what you want to know right, but like you could with the scatter plot graph calories versus grams of fat or fat verse I mean yeah you could you could grab any of these really.  I would also be curious to know if, like there's more calories and stuff that contains NUTS versus no nuts, but that might be something for for Barbara.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:08:43.410):**  To look at that right as we're talking, we can take calories and put calories on the y axis and fat down here, we could switch them and almost make it bigger I don't know what it looks like on your screen.  So we can see right here.  It kind of split but it's still it's makes it a little harder to see so we can remove this.  So now we have calories and fat do we see a relationship here.  let's actually put.

**no speaker (00:09:23.010):** nuts in the Center.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:09:29.190):**  and  Nuts is in the Center notice is here now, what are we seeing.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:09:41.580):**  Well, it appears that grams of fat and calories are correlated but there doesn't really seem to be a distinct difference between like the trend for nuts and no nuts and seeds they seem to be on the same line.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:09:55.350):**  yeah so there's still it's.  Not like there's an outlier maybe this one right here.  And if we hover over it, we can see that Atkins here.  Is a little bit of an outlier its way out here very high in fat very high in calories and it does have mountains.  And, and so one of the things that i'm one of the reasons i'm introducing this is that it's a slightly a different way of thinking about these about playing around with data so far removed both of these.  It does kind of just like a placeholder, but if we wanted to look at them for like.  The type of granola bar.  All here, so now it's just basically a list, and if we were to put NUTS on the bottom.  It shows us the different kinds, broken down.  All the way over here so.  Just an approach to thinking about data in a different way i've been talking a lot about this as.  Rather than going in with this like answer in mind or going in with some sort of intuition about what you're expecting to see where you're expecting to find.  Going in with the idea that we can use data flexibly, we can use it as an approach to help us tell stories and then with a platform like this, this is called code APP or the open data analysis program where we can really put anything in here like we could add.  Chocolate no chocolate like very quickly students, you know anybody I use it a lot with teachers can go in and we can try to represent these things in different ways, so.  One of the highlight that and.  How would you say how would you compare this to the kind of data exploration you've used either when you were in.  Like middle and high school or the kind of data exploration you're doing now it'd be you how would you say how it compares.

**Jessie Hsu (00:12:27.330):**  yeah I think i'll just say like on the level the software that's being used this one is really I guess easy and quick to use, whereas usually I feel like in science classes here for making crafts and stuff we're using excel which.  is more time consuming so when you're using excel you kind of know what you want to graph before you graph it and then you.  Make your graph so there's less I guess room or time for exploration and whereas for this if you're curious about anything you can just like.  click those rows and then the graph will pop up, so I think this one makes it easier for people to just kind of explore and play around with the data.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:13:02.970):**  Thank you.  yeah and the.  And it it kind of brings up a fundamental question as to what are we doing when we're analyzing data like when we're going into excel I think.  Not a lot of people open up excel or Google sheets, or you know any data analysis software and things like Yes, this is going to be so much fun i'm going to go in here and see what I can do.  And, and with that not being the case, you do go in just looking to kind of go in and get out.  And she want to be able to create whatever you feel like you need, and so you don't really get to explore and think about data as something that you can move around and there's a lot that we can do an excel and a lot that we can do here like I can grab.  Any thing and category and sort sort it by either by NUTS or no nuts and so all of this, you can do an excel.  But often we don't spend a lot of time digging into the little key features that we can play around with, and so this program is gaining it's free it's a nsf project and it's gaining a lot of interest because.  Everybody says well my students can't graph for students say oh I don't like traffic or I don't know what i'm doing but it flips it a little bit to thinking about.  Data as this like I like talking about it as the sandbox like every single point doesn't really mean much until you either look at it very carefully know if you've ever seen sand under a microscope.  It looks it brings on a whole new world if you were to observe it closely just that one point.  Or you know if you're messing around in the sandbox it takes some organizing you got to manipulate you got to add some water you got to move some things around.  To before you might start seeing things and it's also very collaborative you know ultimately science is a is a social endeavor and so.  The first thing you want to do when you're playing with something like this is you want to say, like hey come look at this like do you see this do you see this trend, do you see anything going on here, and so it can really shift what's going on, so.  i'm gonna hop us back over here, let me share this document again.  i'll give everybody a second to jump in there.  Alright, so i'm building off of what we talked about last time.  We asked you in between last class and today to pick one of these two options so either this high school unit on race racism in genetics that's very similar to the topics that we've been talking about all semester.  And a case which is the informal science network.  They started curating some some documents, where they full on promise that they're going to add to and refine the documents, the resources that they have there so they're not just documents they're different programs are different.  tons of different things.  So.  Well, what we're going to do is I created slides here, just in case it makes it an easy way for you to present it you click on that it's going to open up.  These slides that just have, what do you choose what did you learn, and then, how is the information presented, you can really share any information.  That you dug into but a slide might make it a clean way and they're just randomly labeled group 123 that way.  or I know a lot of the resources have a lot of things there, so you may want to if you're sharing something screen grab it put it on the slide or, if you prefer to just share your screen, we can set that up too so i'm gonna give you some time.  Probably.  will try 20 minutes and i'll check in and see how everybody's doing and we're going to do just random breakout room groups so once you're in a breakout room.  chat with the partner and share what did you would you find you may have looked at different things, so you might want to copy and have to group one slides or two group five slides and we'll give you.  Why don't we do 25 minutes and that way when we come back we'll just go around everybody can share out like what did you choose what did you learn.  And those are general questions, maybe there's something specific where you pick something about this unit.  And you're really thinking about why does it look that way in high school versus this or why did they leave out this part and not include that part, and so the ultimate aim here is not like a book report style share out.  But to to throw some kindling on the fire like to say, like this, this is something that I noticed, and this is something that now, I have a question about or i'm wondering about does that make sense to everybody.  But any questions before we go into breakout rooms.  All right, off we go.  Alright, welcome back everyone.  To it looks like everybody chose to go with the lesson plans, which is fun so i'm going to share my screen and then we'll just go in order we'll start with start with group one.

**Anya Gupta (00:20:30.900):**  I can start us off so obviously we all kind of engaged with this lesson plan, one thing I really liked was that.  teachers have to complete like a pre module thing before teaching the material, so I thought that was great just kind of checking in with teachers, making sure that.  They aren't holding any of these implicit biases before teaching students, not to hold those biases so that was something that stood out to me.

**Abdul A (00:20:58.440):**  yeah I also want to add.  We also like the fact that there was like actionable items.  So first they define racism, and they also showed ways, you can proactively engage and I think that was pretty good because action does help a lot, you know, knowing that there's something you can do to educate someone better on racism.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:21:24.600):**  All right.  Anything else you'd like to share before we ship to group to see you highlighted that the lesson plans include outside videos tech talks articles powerpoints worksheets made engaging through activities.

**Anya Gupta (00:21:39.900):**  yeah it just seemed pretty comprehensive in terms of corralling up a bunch of different resources.  um, I think, maybe you run the risk, a little bit then of having too much information and then it's hard to pick out like what do you actually want to share with students.  But I liked how many resources were included in it, it was all really accessible like we could easily access it on Google docs.

**no speaker (00:22:00.600):** it's pretty.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:22:02.640):**  awesome alright thanks group one.  Over to Darren and Ryan.

**Ryan Lane (00:22:13.980):**  Yes.  We kind of highlighted the same things we were impressed like at the level of like multimedia incorporation of like the tech talks and videos and the powerpoints and then.  By like breaking it down these eight distinct lesson plans they're able to tackle these you know difficult, complex issues and, like a very digestible format which I thought was very helpful.  And then yeah and then because of that they're able to address some high level concepts like things that we address this class like genetic similarity between people of different races in a way that I think like is easy to understand for high school students so.

**Zion Kang (00:22:53.070):**  yeah and down to that, I think it was like a really.  Essential topic for to have this discussion with the high school students that's when they were performing identities as like adults in like.  are beginning to form the identity, so I think it's really important to help them understand because I think it's sometimes.  The mind subconsciously limit themselves, I think that internalized like a racist values or just staring is about race that's like represented in popular culture, media, so I think it's really good to break down misconception today.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:23:28.380):**  Excellent thanks Ryan.  All right, good evening Jesse.

**Jessie Hsu (00:23:37.350):**  yeah I think we.  highlighted a lot of the similar things that the other groups did.  And I think one thing that we noticed is how similar like the lesson structure was actually this class.  How it starts with having the students reflect on their own identity and then it goes on to talk about scientific racism and the history of it and then.  The genetics itself and then health inequities so we thought that was very interesting and how.  Maybe it didn't have some of the more complex topics science wise like epigenetics but on the sociological front, a lot of the topics were very nuanced like we were quite impressed by how they.  explored the differences between like systemic racism personally mediated racism and internalized racism.  And I think that's very important because a lot of the times when people who are opposed to this kind of education, their reason or excuses that.  This is too complex, or for kids to learn about or something they don't need to know about, but I think this lesson plan really goes to show that actually kids can handle these topics as long as they're presented in a digestible format.

**Vivian X Shen (00:24:47.040):**  yeah and just add on to that.  We thought, like the teacher pre modules were also really helpful and beneficial as the other groups have mentioned.  In preparing for teaching courses, such as this, and we also really liked how the final lesson was more so, a call to action and, like an overall reflection on the top of our top because they.  yeah it's just a better way to reflect on the topics and for students to kind of understand the full capacity of what they're learning.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:25:22.710):**  Yes, thanks thanks for being Jesse.  Right group five.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:25:35.610):**  yeah, I guess, I could go first since I focus on the pre modules.  For the curriculum i'm like I really found those to be interesting because they talked a lot about stuff that I don't know I guess I wouldn't consider it external to what.  was actually being taught in class but it definitely focused a lot more like preparation for the teacher to like you know, even though they might be going into this with good intentions, to make sure that they're not also maybe saying something that would.  You know, like make other other students feel marginalized within their class, you know, like things they had like a whole section of like things, not to say, or like.  How do we deal with these conversations in classrooms i'm also talking about like, how do we deal with you know what parents might say about this being taught in a science classroom so I found those to be pretty interesting.  You know, I think it was it was definitely shorter than what an annual looked at like with the resources and stuff.  But, and it seemed very accessible, with all of the citations in there, so if you wanted to learn more, but obviously like.  I know, teachers, spend a lot of time preparing for, for you know lesson plans and what they're going to teach, so I think it's important that it was short enough that can be done in like one setting.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:26:59.130):**  yeah you're saying the pre module amanda.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:27:02.010):**  yeah The pre modules.  yeah yeah.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:27:06.690):**  awesome Thank you.

**Ananya Mishra (she/her) (00:27:09.360):**  yeah so I actually did look at the anti racism resource Roundup on and it's basically just a very long list of a lot of different kinds of resources on.  How racism manifests in stem both in education, but also like practice and why incorporating anti racism is necessary and how to go about doing that as well.  I looked at a few different resources and to stuck out to me specifically on one was actually a very comprehensive Google Doc of its own list of.  Resources for anti racism and it kind of takes you, step by step, through your I guess.  Quote unquote anti racism journey by listing different kinds of books at different levels of accessibility both like fiction nonfiction as well as podcasts articles on.  And yeah I actually bookmarked it because I thought it was really useful and so detailed and systematic and how I guess it went through what kind of books to read at what stage of.  yeah I guess your journey through anti racism and then another was a document compiled by biology students actually on that contain very detailed and just very well phrased responses to common criticisms of including anti racism and stem.  Like, for example, oh stem should be a meritocracy so you know by forcing inclusion or diversity or compromising the quality of the science.  And just they listed 10 common arguments and very detailed responses to each of them, including like citations and I thought that was also very useful, especially when people kind of use the same rebuttals.  To kind of have these like No, this is, you know data show is this is why that's not a valid argument um but yeah, I think, in general, the the resource Roundup, is a great.  resource on because there is a lot on and my only I guess criticism for lack of better word is that there is so much, and it can be overwhelming if you're not really sure where to start.  So maybe it could be like it is organized right now, on the basis of what kind of content, it is of like Oh, this is a book, this is a Twitter exchange, this is an article, but maybe i'm organizing it further by topic could be or like sub topic could be more helpful and making it more accessible.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:29:54.240):**  yeah for sure, and thank you for saying that, I think that that's one of the things that.  it's always a tension with those.  resource lists.  Because I love that you highlighted that like one of the Nice resources that you found was another list of resources or another list of responses or and so they're often like this bridge into a whole new world of another whole set of resources.  And, like the curation of those like organization and the upkeep and making sure the link still work and making sure that the content is still up to date is like a full time job ended up itself, I mean I know with my website that is just ideas science ideas for teachers to use.  It was start and it's just me and I always get email from people that are saying you know, dear administrators, can you, and then it has all these requests like just me about you know it's got over 3 million people on there, and things.  need the resources to really be able to be utilized in in the right ways, and I feel like.  It almost also makes me think of you know, the people that are trying to do the work.  it's it's not easy when they're not sure where to go, you know I know I last summer worked with a teacher who consider herself on an island in Vermont and she.  would always talk about how she's like I don't have any colleagues that are trying to do this work I don't know anybody at the university level that can help me and so.  She joined this group thinking about climate science, but that was one of her like hey over lunchtime would anybody like to talk about you know thinking about anti racist science teaching, because I am trying to do this work, but i'm feel very alone and so.  Thank you for digging into those those resources.  Alright group three.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (00:32:06.120):**  We can go ahead and start with the first person we thought this is like kind of what a lot of groups are saying is very concise and.  In a visual manner, especially we were looking a lot of the lesson plans, so there was a great use of like the op eds is your very similar to the case studies kind of that we are assigned which we thought was really cool.  And there is actually this one part of the of the website, there is a cool setting the stage on portion which I thought was great and in terms of like sending Community guidelines been talking talking about sensitive topics.  So I thought that was cool and i'll let come on go on to the next part.

**Komal Wasif (00:32:43.260):**  yeah I don't really want to reiterate everything.  Everyone said, but all the groups of second, the same thing we noticed it was really eye catching have really great graphics was really accessible.  And we thought that maybe it could discuss like bit more about like previous science, research, I was been more racist and their ideology.  and discuss like why they were wrong, because I think that I personally have never like learn about this stuff not much until I got to college, so I think it'd be great to kind of pre exposed to that.  And then we both thought that the tick dog idea was great because, like almost everybody's on tick tock it's a great way to like kind of relate to students and keep them interested so yeah.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:33:22.440):**  Great.  Alright, so stop sharing for a second so, how does this compare and thinking about.  This unit this race racism and genetics unit, how does it compare to the science experiences that you had in your own kind of K 12 journey.  Amina.

**Amanda Katchmar (00:33:48.120):**  yeah I mean the one thing is like when I did look through the pre modules I also looked at the the curriculum in the lesson plans for this.  Like the site, the racism and genetics curriculum for high school and I was just wondering like how you know Okay, so I went to a public school in Pennsylvania, and like my biology class.  We had to do an end of year like state test for for bio and I just remember this crunch time like two weeks before the exam.  To make sure that we learned everything that we needed to know for this test like it was a very much like.  Teaching to the test type thing, and nowhere did we talk about racism like I just wonder where this curriculum has been taught that teachers have two weeks to spare new.  to teach it because, like I think it's super important but it's definitely it definitely seem time consuming, and I was.  I know that, like in my own high school experience I don't know if I could ever think of a time in any of my science classes, where we would have been able to like fit this in.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:34:56.910):**  And i'd love to hear what others.  Think based on that before.  or just to add it on your own experiences.  Using my way time right now.  See.

**Jessie Hsu (00:35:32.070):**  yeah I guess I just had like a similar thought because well for context, I went to public school in California, and then we also never really covered anything like this and it definitely is really important to cover.  But it's just that, like high school biology, it covers kind of everything that's not just a generic class or just a cell bio class so.  I guess, I was also wondering like amanda like where they would fit it into the curriculum because they definitely should it would just require.  Massive like rework of how we do science in K 12 right now.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:36:08.850):**  well.

**Komal Wasif (00:36:10.080):**  i'm by this isn't like really science science, but like in my high school, I went to brooklyn high school so here in Massachusetts and we had a class on.  Honestly, I can't remember the name i'm sorry, but it was like something related to race on and we basically spent.  It was an early morning class, it was like the class before the regular schedule that some students were like it was optional take if your sophomore and older.  And my class and I, we were like 20 kids and we were the guinea pigs first take the class and NBC just talked about kind of what we talked about like racial disparities it talked about systemic inequalities.  and talk about our own high school itself, like the racism we've seen in a high school in the past and current events that were like racist and we discussed them and.  I like how they could be addressed better and our actually our teachers will talk to the principal and share our student ideas and.  Things like that of course it's not really science related but um it was just an extra class of students who were interested.  were able to take, and they were able to discuss these ideas and teachers kind of like took our ideas also and learn from it, and like discuss how they could better their own.  i'm like curriculums like English curriculum everything, like, for example, we talked about the English curriculum like how songbooks say.  The N word and how that is an appropriate and any any way of saying that and worship and he said, even though it was like the teachers meant to kind of like.  Give the feeling of the book they still should be saying stuff like that, like we talked about a lot of stuff and I thought that was a really great class that we had and that could be an idea or ideal for like future High School so us.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (00:37:38.010):**  yeah for sure.  And I think.  The I agree with everything you say when you say that it's there wasn't a science class, I think that I would push on that a little bit and I often do when i've worked with administrators.  Because they think of things as being so narrowly siloed like when we do math we're not allowed to talk about social studies topic so we're not allowed to write about math we're just supposed to be doing right answers.  And I know it's it's all over the education news with what's happening in Florida, both with the quote unquote don't say gay law and the.  The comment I made about math just being about right answers, and so it is a sadly it's a timely topic that people are talking about like well, what should we be talking about what are these these things, and I could actually share.  My screen again.  To.  And I say sadly it's a timely topic because people administrators, are trying to figure out like what does this mean for classrooms what should be changing and so.  This I created this graphic.  that'll be sharing later today, this is the group, I can pop up the slides see and we're not going through all of these.  But.  This is the group here, the National Science, education leadership association, and so they think about science leaders broadly.  But basically leadership anybody who has an influence on science, whether it be a teacher leader, whether it be a stem coach science coach or a district person or an assistant principal all we have to superintendents and and so.  i'm sharing that like this stuff on the left this like kind of light blue side is the common or the more traditional.  And Some would argue, an outdated approach to science, education, where the focus is on facts or worksheets or the IRA is this initiation response evaluation kind of thing where you'd say like hey who knows what.  You know the difference between them, you know what grab what do we mean by gravity and then somebody would raise their hand and say I think gravity is like this and the teacher would either say.  yep all right does everybody hear that and then you'd move on, or if it was seen as an incorrect answer.  The teacher might say, like not quite does anybody else have an idea like and i'm sure you that sounds very familiar that was you know a lot of what we experienced.  But it isn't it doesn't mirror the kinds of things that are happening in real in the real world and so and it's also very disengaging and so.  Explaining phenomenon solving problems like that's what science is really about you're trying to figure something out in the world, whether it be.  You know why sometimes is the moon out during the day, like Why can I see it, during the day I thought it was just the light and the nighttime thing with the sun and the way that the lights bouncing around.  Rather than like oh we're going to talk about the phases of the moon, by taking an oreo cookie and pulling it apart and looking at like some.  Of the of the white stuff and less and more like that's really not that's representing something that you see in the world, but it's not really.  doing the work of science, and so we talked about this as the shift away from learning about figuring out.  Where sense, making is the focus because it's a topic that matters it's something that you may be interested in or it's something that you didn't know that you were interested in.  But it's made interesting by an engaging phenomenon or a problem that you're trying to solve and.  And we're trying to get away from the the siloed or disconnected approach to science, because when you get in the world everything's messy everything's together everything connects overlaps and so.  And there's math you know when you get into science you're constantly writing you're trying to create your argument you're trying to have your argument crafted with evidence in a way that's clearer than somebody else and so.  The the talk that i'm giving later today is is to help leaders think about like well, what are the assets that learners bring to science classrooms and i'm sure you've all heard of the APP asset versus deficit based approach.  But it's basically focusing on talents, rather than a deficit model is one that focuses on what students can't do.  So thinking about the comment about you know classroom focused on cramming for the test.  Usually, that is somebody coming in saying like well what don't we know i'm going to go around them and find out what you all get wrong on the test or on the pre test and then we're going to focus on.  The things that we don't know rather than shifting it to like what can we do with the science knowledge that we have.  And now I know you know, having taken and taught a bunch of ap courses sometimes you just need to know things to be able to pass the test to build a show that you can study in pram but that's a whole different story and so.  One of the things in science, education is the shift towards like curiosity like, how can we bring curiosity back like get students to make these faces.  When you're trying to like you're intrigued you're actually curious you're actually excited about something.  And it's important because it prepares the brain for learning, you know really kind of puts your brain in a state we're like all right, we need to know something about this, because we're we're interested we're into it and.  And this shift.  is thinking about things like everyday things everyday things that you might not normally think of this was one that I shared that was just a tweet about somebody took this photo of the life cycle of a strawberry.  So, like, why are we always talking about butterflies, and why are we always talking about you know meal worms turning into beetles when like does a strawberry have a life cycle.  And it went kind of crazy viral just a very, very simple thing that I think a lot of people have seen.  But what was exciting is that people started arguing about like well that's not the life cycle, you need the whole plan you can't have just the life cycle of the fruit and other people were saying well that's you know, technically, the fruit is the end.  It was something that gets people talking gets people going back and forth and and arguing about something.  And one of the challenges that comes up with this is.  This tension between the right answer and the wrong answer like, how do we, how do we focus on making progress and moving forward the word that one of you mentioned was like oh in my classroom, we have to cover the material and so.  curriculum in schools is often seen as like stuff, we have to cover we've got to do this we've got to check this box and we got to do this, we got to check that and so.  How can we reframe thinking about curriculum it's something that we've just got to cover and get through, because we're not like we as educators we're not teaching.  curriculum we're teaching people.  And so, how do we get away from thinking that like oh these people in the room i've got to teach curriculum at them or kind of tell tell these ideas to these people so that they now know those ideas.  At the same time, we know in educational research and in the literature about the learning sciences that like.  people learn basically 10% of what you lecture at them, so why are we still doing it the same way if 90% of that information is a waste of time and and that's you know, a whole other conversation about lecture versus a more dynamic approach.  But like having that right answer and this anxiety stress piece here is connected to how we think about what we're trying to do, and education, and sometimes the it's messy the the answers.  Not what we thought, and this is a little bit older the Gallup student poll looks at engagement for students, and so this is engagement from fifth grade through.  12th grade and it's not a it's not an exciting looking graph that engagement goes down and there's a tiny, tiny.  bit maybe it looks like it levels out it goes up a tiny bit and 12th grade and that's probably because students are like yes i'm done.  And they don't need to think about it as much, but I wonder if some of that engagement connects back to the fact that, like often it's so standards focused that like here, you can see, under this I just googled like.  A teacher and I don't want to say who it was and where I found it's not about that, but just you see under science right here, it says define academic vocabulary words and then learn about food chains and so.  Like when you see what you're doing on the board like that's the goal that's The ultimate aim is to define academic vocabulary words I love science i'm not excited about that.  And so versus I was working at this school for many years and I walked by a girl and rather than saying.  You know what do you learn about and like oh we're trying to learn about how to define academic vocabulary words you know, often the student to look by you and look at the board to see what they're what they're supposed to learn about.  or they might have a packet that they're working through.  And this was a first grade are walking down the hallway and she yelled out miss tj when are you going to come work with us, and I said I don't know what are you working on she said we're trying to figure out like.  spider plants like are the babies, just like the parents or sometimes the baby's going to grow up to be some sort of different thing.  Like you know other plans and some like that sounds exciting like we gotta go figure that out like, how do we shifted away from the like.  who's learning about these things about plants to like we're trying to figure out if, like these baby spider plants are going to be the exact same plant that they came from, or if they're going to be something different, and.  To do this we have to shift some of the other things so like this is, I same thing I just looked for classroom norms to see what was going on out there and.  think like a scientist, be a good lab partner be on time and then they're all these consequences down here, this one is framed around do not do not do these things do not touch do not touch.  No double standards, keep to yourself, stop talking with the instructor like, how is that so different than here is a set of norms that we shared recently i'm part of this elementary science teacher educator group that we call nest egg.  Like if you look at the differences here between like don't do that everybody quiet, you know lean into discomfort don't expect closure be critical of ideas, not individuals use I statements and speak from your own experiences, instead of generalizing.  You know step back, when appropriate, allow everyone a chance to speak so like, why are the norms different when when we talk about adults and and students and.  And I think in attending the equity like Why is this so important.  That like not only the students build positive traits when schools are placing an emphasis on this, but this allows a leader school leaders.  To bring in and establish these Community parent school partnerships and do something like this map here is a asset based community.  resourcing so like going on these maps and mapping, what are the resources in our Community, you know what what can we use here around the school to.  Keep to learn about science learn about writing one school that I was working with they went to a local sewage treatment plant.  which you think students who live close don't want to do that, and it was their favorite place they actually fundraise to go the two years in a row.  Because they were like oh my God, this is the place that like is right down the street like we've driven by this so many times.  And they as they got older they started talking with the chemists there and talking with the engineers there to learn about the science ideas that are there and.  It also shifts us in thinking on assets of which to build that are both benefiting the student and ultimately science bringing these diverse customs these different orientations.  And not thinking of and privileging one way of knowing over another, like there's a lot of different ways that we can understand and access this information and describe it, that aren't linked to these ways these more traditional ways that we were taught in the past and.  And in doing this we move away from thinking about these ideas as like passive.  Like, we have to just absorb them a love this.  This young student putting the information in their head, I feel like i've done that i've been there many, many times in my life.  and away from like you see the just compared the searches for facts versus knowledge and people aren't looking for knowledge on Google.  you're not going to get it you don't know find it you're going to find facts you're gonna find information you're going to find little blips of information.  But to build knowledge it's really a social pursuit it's something that you need to go public with your thinking and need to argue about these different ideas and it's very messy and so.  Really, the ultimate aim is to to be able to shift into some of the lessons like.  The race racism and genetics, that I shared so that.  People can start to go down the rabbit holes of the things that they're interested in and and by interested in, I mean.  we're reframing the stuff so we're not just covering these science topics that you know, we need to test on.  we're really working to reframe there's a lot of work happening in assessment to change assessment to.  being seen as a caring practice so assessment isn't just a punitive thing it's not a, this is what you don't know.  But if we truly value what we're assessing and we truly value the relationships we have with students, then when we're assessing students it's about knowing what they know it's about.  celebrating the resources that they bring, and not saying Oh well, they didn't they didn't use the right vocab word or they didn't say it, the way that they that we expected them to say it, and ultimately.  The The ultimate aim.  is building relationships and students, like all of the I always say everything I do is is ultimately because of the learner.  You know whether it's professional development, whether it's building curriculum whether it's talking with teachers doing this, you know anything it's about the learner at the end.  And so I love this quote we surround young people with respect and love help them safely explore their talents interests and values.  Give them chances to make a difference in their families, schools and communities were metaphorically letting them jump into our arms I love this little these two penguins where.  They both lost their mates and penguins do mate for life, and this photographer was trying to get a great photo and.  The biologist who was studying them and the photographer came together and talked about it, that there was like a little bit more happening behind the photo.  But that these two came together, and now they they groom each other and the hangout and it is just so adorable so.  wanted to share a little window into some of the work that's happening to shift away from the kind of more traditional science, education that's happening and.  and share the excitement that leaders are are open to thinking about these shifts and and not just talking about biology in the example that we've all done or the labs that we've always done or the the components.  Like here like experiences and science that used to be focused on ideas that are pre planned they have an outcome.  You know your lab report it's about explaining why you didn't get the answer that you were supposed to and instead shifting towards sense, in a sense, making.  Trying to understand why things were the way they were and how to shift them and part of that is about talking about the things that are difficult to talk about.  And i'm going to end today on one of those, and so this is a middle school.  And I before I share, welcome to science class i'm trying to highlight that this 380 4000 views is not enough so share this with people.  But this is a.  middle school science teacher who's telling the story which i'm sure you've all heard but past their middle school students.  to dig into the story and tell it so make sure you can hear it if somebody could give me a thumbs up, let me know that you've been here at.  comic fan you're about to see the store Franklin vs Watson and Crick as told by some incredibly talented seventh graders from oakland California questions about the science, the content.  The history write them in the comments below and if you stick around to the credits i'll be back to give you some more information about how you can get involved enjoy.

**no speaker (00:56:56.550):** Tom will you tell us your story. Okay i'm getting an apprentice cray cray cray cray cray and ain't nobody fresh in the air watch in a cray cray cray cray cray nobody's making models like once in a cray cray cray cray cray except for line is but we beat them to that double he. don't tell nobody saw. Read to remember to. make him doing things. But these past, we had a minute long place then. Do a model had to change. Say CG who might you know to change so rosy. rosie data. been recognized frank. frank show Monday. let's recognize Franklin. Nice. Whatever. i'm soaking surely don't want to be a scientist he became a world class my yeah follow my dreams and I kings but. She needs to change your hair was that you could say why you were checking miles I use my X Ray, what do you know about getting your data, the way he wasn't he looks we must face outside. And play with you, as I was almost a you. notice that you're. guys.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:00:38.010):**  Alright, and i'll put the link to that video in the chat which i'm sure you all can find it.  But a whole different type of story about learning about the science it's out there, but they did a ridiculously good job of putting that together, telling the story and highlighting all those pieces.  All right, we're going to end there today.  If there are any questions specifically about units or anything that are about um are your final projects and happy to hang out if not.

**Amanda Katchmar (01:01:19.650):**  yeah I had a question about the final like the presentation um I noticed on the the page, there were like peer reviews and that was like 10% very great, can you just like you know we're talking about this, and like outcomes and all that but, like you know, I was curious about.  What it'll look like on Thursday and how will be presenting and what peer reviews will look like.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:01:43.050):**  Sure, so they'll.  they'll be an easy link that everybody will have access to so when you do a presentation.  Everybody will be able to go into the link and give you a little bit of feedback we know it isn't a huge amount of time, but it can be helpful to hear from classmates peers, who are saying, like oh that's great like have you thought about this or did you read that those kind of things.

**Amanda Katchmar (01:02:07.110):**  Okay cool thanks.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:02:08.610):**  it's not gonna be anything huge like I wouldn't be.  concerned about it, if anything, it will be a nice like.  additive component that might help you for the final project.

**Amanda Katchmar (01:02:20.160):**  awesome Thank you.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (01:02:22.920):**  I also have a question on.  Since it says around 10 minutes to presentation is should be presenting for 10 minutes, or are we giving time for people's feedback.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:02:32.610):**  So we.  have them in blocks of 15 so figure about 10 to present and then five for questions comments.  And we have some flexibility with the time but.  If we all stayed at 10 for presenting that'll give us five minutes for comments and questions.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (01:02:48.030):**  Okay, thank you and can we expand upon like the different topics that you had on the like General like presentation template from.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:02:55.410):**  Oh yeah definitely that was just meant as like a bare bones like maybe it's helpful to talk about some of these.

**Jhoely Duque-Jimenez (she/her) (01:03:01.650):**  Okay, so we can like okay cool Thank you.  Definitely yeah.  Good jazz it up.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:03:05.730):**  you're going to add more her Those are just meant to get good everybody started.  Any other questions.  All right.

**Abdul A (01:03:20.310):**  I just had a question real quick um so my presentation is essentially like a podcast um I haven't started recording but.  When I present on Thursday at my expected to like have some tangible results, like, for my podcast like sure I have something concrete work I just talked about it before I record.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:03:40.440):**  You could totally just talk about it, like I would talk about some of the elements are going to highlight how you're going to do it, you know if you're if you're using clips or whatever like just more like if you were.  talking to a colleague who you're saying like hey would you like to you know produce this with me or work on this with me, I would present it like that.  Or that.  Everybody would like have a sense of it by the end.

**Abdul A (01:04:10.170):**  Any other questions.

**TJ McKenna (he/him) (01:04:15.900):**  Alright, if you have an individual question you wanted to stay off i'll hang on for a moment, but if not I hope everybody has a wonderful Tuesday and a good week.

**Felicity Crawford (01:04:27.660):**  And cj.

**Amanda Katchmar (01:04:28.740):**  Thank you, thank you.

**Ananya Mishra (she/her) (01:04:32.040):**  Q, thank you.

