---
---

# Epigenetics in Human Health/Environment and Epigenetics

**Date:** 3/17/2022

**Fred Wasserman (00:00:31.050):**  we're good Melissa whatever you did with good.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:00:35.190):**  Oh it's all Adam but okay.

**Fred Wasserman (00:00:37.560):**  All right, well, I was that I have the wrong link.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:00:40.800):**  I think we were supposed to log into Boston university zoom before we started the meeting and.  I did it.

**Fred Wasserman (00:00:47.100):**  My fault okay so.  You can see everything okay so take a look at this from the Boston globe.  And this was not ago pregnancy related deaths were already rising in us than coven arrive, and things got worse just take a look at the statistics, the greatest increasing deaths among black women for whom the mortality rate was 55 of out of 100,000.  increase.  And it is three times the rate for white women.  Now that's shocking this particular slide from the globe really drives at home here is the mortality rate maternal mortality rate and it's not in childbirth, it could be right after childbirth when they're not getting proper care individuals are not getting proper care, so this is.  In 2020 all right now, what I like to do is just sort of say to you that this is a problem, this is systemic racism.  And what is it that can be done to actually help this and to before you get there, I think you have to define what the problem is, and this particularly global article I think does that rather well.  What you look here is, this is the group's hardest hit by coven 19 are actually, of course, people who are severely.  lacking in the ability to get.  medical care.  And one of the things that they found, and this was another global article from a week after that march 7 now you all heard of lauren coven.  And so, people will walk in and you get treated for long coven now turns out that if you look at the data you'll find that people who are black are much less likely to be treated for long covert then, if you are white.  So this was dozens of clinics, this is something called.  A psp a SEC, and if this is a series of clinics around the country and, if you are being treated in that particular case it's extreme fatigue.  Brain fog difficulty breathing hot palpitations and the clinics and mostly seeing white women and that poor people not people of color and it's an enormous discrepancy.  And what is the reason for that and, in fact, if you look at the data, you find that Boston medical Center is true had treated approximately 70% of the patients for Ovid.  are black 70% and in there one clinic, which is an association with mass general it's treating something like 40% of the people are black.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:03:54.450):**  and

**no speaker (00:03:55.230):** gay.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:03:56.820):**  You share your screen on the zoom so that um.  Ah picture is also coming over.

**Fred Wasserman (00:04:02.610):**  Where I apologize no worries.  You keep keep me going on that so.  You know, you know, make sure I do this correctly I don't want to mess up.

**Melisa Osborne (she/her) (00:04:13.560):**  Now you're doing great.

**Fred Wasserman (00:04:15.210):**  Now all right hold on.  I did not do that, nor did I Okay, my apologies got a little flustered with the.

**no speaker (00:04:34.500):** yeah.

**Fred Wasserman (00:04:36.540):**  So that's where I would my completely my fault what I did not do was.  Was sign into be you first I didn't do that with this alright alright so.  If you look at this then.  you've got to ask the question why is it that people of color are not being treated.  Now this gave us a little bit of a list and i'd like to just see which of these you think are the most maybe significant of the of this whole group so Ryan, take a look at these and tell me which do you think is most important, lack of sick pay and long working hours.  For people who are poor.  Many don't have primary care doctors don't even know where to turn for help.  Many poor and disadvantage people have other health concerns conditions, long before coping 19.  The symptoms may be blame on those of pre existing illnesses, for instance, if someone already suffer from asthma, for example, breathing difficulties may have been seen as more of the same So if you have those conditions initially it could easily be the case that you never know I.  This one scares me what a black person or Latino person or a poor person speaks of fatigue they're often dismiss this lazy.  And finally, if you are overwhelmed with so many issues, people may not even notice that this neurological deficit and brain fog is happening because of the normal trauma they are dealing with so just Ryan, which of these do you think might be most important for.  compounding factors worse outcomes for people all right good answer and is that something that can be done amanda.  This is what you're going to be doing for the next step for you click this.

**no speaker (00:06:36.570):** One good place to start you know it's like getting people access to care, you know, have a primary care doctor if they don't have the ability to take time off work or a way to go to the doctor's office and so where did you start. I mean.

**Fred Wasserman (00:06:56.670):**  Well, I mean there's gotta be something we can do yeah I think it's good for me, I was at the policy level, you know, making sure that their policies in place that would ensure Okay, instead of saying.  Oh take care of your agents, you know because it's such a systemic issue like this job okay Julie anything.  So I would say that, in general, just increasing the amount of earning care doctors in these areas that are that are very are hit session blackmail me to.  Some of these things it's very hard to change, for example, the statement that I think is the greatest about an electrician or meeting in person.  The teacher says lazy that's something that's changing a person's ideas which are really hard to do and the stage so like amanda said more policy.  What about training doctors.  Matthew I think you can do that yeah so at that point about.  definitely think that, for example, like outreach programs to underserved communities are definitely help push the pendulum in the right direction, it also true about educating doctors as well to be conscious of these biases that's.

**no speaker (00:08:10.830):** The.

**Fred Wasserman (00:08:12.930):**  demographics are faced with on a daily basis, affects our health okay like you know aren't going to.  be conscious of this as well, I am I understand it is you guys are going to be doing projects and the projects that you're going to eventually be doing our solutions, I think that this is one that I would.  Know say handle you know, this is a PowerPoint which is made available to you take a look at each I mean I, this is what I would do I would say.  What can be done for each of these but that's you know this is you're going to do whatever you want alright, so now, you know if you look at this it's just so prevalent.  It we have a society that is the here's the data on the Boston medical Center.  The long haul the clinic about half of the patients with black but based on the COPD patients that the hospital retreated they said they expected 70 80% and that's because they treated 80% of the clients.  Patients were black and only 50% that coming into this clinics so there's something going on there's no biological reason for this, this is systemic racism.  Okay Next, I have another case which I don't want I don't want to do not want Melissa to hear.  And it is probably the most important thing that I will say to this class So even if there's nothing else of interest to you i'd like you to to understand this particular problem.  How many of you have heard of toxoplasmosis this is okay, most of you a few of you that all right now, when good Jesse, can you tell me a little bit about what you know that toxoplasmosis.  Yes, so what do you, what do you, what is your answer your sister been told, when they get pregnant.  get away from those cat letters you don't want to go me of them, you really don't want to do that all right now, the reason for that.  is because there is a parasite that is transmitted through the cat it is reproducing in there it's a protozoa.  It reproduces in the cat ends up in the feces and then what happens is it's transmitted to a rat, which is the intermediate host so that's the.  The procedure that it goes through this and intubated host where the reproduces asexually, and that makes its way into the sexually producing cat.  Now, what happens when this parasite gets into the brain of the cat excuse me brain of the rat it actually ends up in big the amygdala and it destroys the fear response.  So that the rat then proceed now just think about this, think about that how evolution works it decides that i'm not afraid of cats anymore.  Now, apparently, is still afraid of other things, but it's not afraid of cats there's been one theory that's the test it actually makes the cat urine smell sexually attractive.  which has been debated and then, so the rat then proceeds to put itself in position which could be eaten by the cat.  Now let me explain so you're not listening, I want you to listen to this.  If you are pregnant and that parasite gets into the embryo, you are in severe difficulty the brain of that developing fetus will be destroyed in the same way as that of a rat.  If you should become pregnant if a significant other of your whatever becomes pregnant, you will be told by your physician to avoid cats don't do the litter so somebody else doing that grandma and grandpa take care of the cat.  Now you have you guys heard that before, yes, but not everybody has order right all right now turns out that this this particular parasite what goes on is that.  There are two phases this particular parasite if you look at the way this plays out, it is affected, approximately 2 billion people worldwide.  Most of the time is in an in active state.  turns out that this paper which came out in January of 2020 and turns out that it is affecting a particular transcription factor called bfd one.  And that particular transcription factor is going to either make the parasite effective infective whatnot.  And the reason why i'm bringing up to you here is because, even though there's one quarter of the world that has that which means were 16 people in this room four of us actually have this parasite and it doesn't do any harm.  What i'm suggesting to you, according to this paper is be fd one accumulates during stress.  Who are we talking about as being stressed out, so it is another particular medical problem that could be affecting people who are.  Of color.  Stress synthetic expression significant to drive the differentiation, basically, making it an effective disease.  So I threw this in just because I had been reading about it and it just seemed to fit.  All right, so don't know I don't know nobody's really studied, whether or not there are people of color black people actually have more likely to have this but seems likely if we were talking about stress, causing this so Okay, so we get away from this.  Next, now, this is where I think get things get really interesting in the study of epigenetics and it's not something that you normally would associate.  Now the work that i'm going to do and talk about is bringing us back to 2004 where this all began again Matthew and come all.  You know you guys had a little bit of this and intro in animal behavior we did this you do you there too Okay, so we have everybody all right now, so this is the story about epigenetics and maternal care.  All right, what you're looking at is a well nurturing mother and mom that, basically, is completely indifferent.  that's pretty strange.  This is something where I mean I can show you a movie of of the what would they mean by a non.  Mother that's nurturing it will take to cut the cubs are removed the pups are moved that will move them back it will lick them to groom them.  And it is an individual who has been raised by a lackadaisical mother, a mother, that does not provide that type of parental care, then those individuals, the offspring when they become others are not likely to provide that type of parental care.  So what is suggesting, in this case is that you run the stress, and this is all an epigenetic effect with methylation.  If you're under stress and you're not providing parental care for young they're going to be growing up under the same type of stress that you grew up on the and it's going to perpetuate itself.  Now that sounds so crazy and I know, Melissa sitting there thinking my God.  What what you know what about the possibility of these of mice she uses an example with meal worms that are cannibals and you know, does that mean humans and animals.  and humans eating no, but this is something that that we have a pretty good handle on in terms of the Malian behavior Now I want to, as I said, do a little bit more biology in this class and to show you this new this original paper that had come out.  So this is an epigenetic issue and, apparently, it has to do with the Google quarter quite receptive.  rats raised by less nurturing mothers tended to have more methyl groups attached to the motor region on the on switch the code quite receptive J.  let's go through that again rackspace raised by less mercury mothers and we introduce to you the idea and the concept behind.  epigenetics methylation is going to turn off the gene expression a civilization is going to turn on the gene expression.  So it turns it basically attaches to the promoter region on the on switch and these methyl groups block access by the transcription factors that turn on the Jane as a result, fewer bluebird quarter code receptors are produced.  So it's absolutely messing up the actual process of working with cortisol just doesn't work right.  Subsequent experiments show that enzymes that reverse DNA methylation.  Of the group of quote unquote receptive Jane also reverse the effects of unenthusiastic others on the oldest springs or hormonal and behavioral responses to stress.  So what we're looking at is something that in rats can possibly be projected to what is happening in humans, where we're under stress the amount of bitcoin receptors are going to be reduced.  The effect of cortisol cortisol is going to be affected now what I want to show is again there's another part of it's not just the Google critical.  path pups raised by nurturing moms exhibit great methylation yes, reduce expression of the gene for a particular estrogen receptor in the hypothalamus.  And this in the hypothalamus of the brain, this is, in large measure, responsible for reproductive behavior.  So it's not just the bucquoy deployed and then not sure exactly how it works, but we're going to take a look at that initial experiment, the form in 2004 to get a feeling.  Now from there, as I say, it's a little difficult to extend that to humans, but I want you to think along those specific lines.  So the person who did this work is named ziff Z se y F and he has a very nice Ted talk.  And i've got to try to show why I won't try it because, again, there was an issue with trying to get it, but what he did was he also was interested in how that affected people.  And I thought God bless you, this was a very interesting part of his work that they talk that they explained, he looked at the post one of brands have 24 people who needed suit committed suicide.  And he actually had the idea that he knew that some of them were under extreme stress and i've been abused and he wanted to look at the number of methyl groups of the gluten quarter quite receptive.  And he found a relationship as you would expect those that had been on the stress those that had been.  Supposedly committing suicide for this reasons had more of the methyl groups of the gluten quite receptive than those that the mat.  But I haven't heard more about that, so I don't know more about that once again we have the biology is still methylation is going to an imaging activity.  histone assimilation, is going to promote gene activity all right now i'm going to try to do this in a fashion Do you remember this little from last year.  little bit all right you'll go all right now just follow the biology behind this they measure, the amount of licking and grooming at arch back nursing in rats.  Those are maternal behaviors that are a good parent would do so when you see the term LG it's looking and grooming, you see the term arch back right there see it's ABN and those are good moms.  Now, what do you think i'm going to show you in terms of methylation if you look at the offspring of a mother, that was a good mother with lots of looking grooming and lots of watch back there saying what is the percentage methylation you're going to see you they're.  Very low, however, if she doesn't do that well what's the methylation guide today.  boy you're good all right now all right right now i'm that's what i'm looking for all right so.  The data and again this is just need experiment 2004 but this where this all started with the effect of epigenetics on human behaviors.  So they look at the glue to quarter quarter receptor gene, and here it is, and this is a part of it, between 1681.  Well 16 to 18 and 64, and this is a specific region now remember about how the epigenetics work the methyl group is attaching to a CG by the CG.  term so and it's either at the five prime end where the three primary now you guys are all biologists you'll dig through.  cell bios I don't have to tell you the difference between a SCI fi prime three prime but take a look at this and if you don't mind.  Just tell me what this says to you, right here, this is sections 123 progressively going from left to right and then this is section 16 and 17, so this is that area, right here.  So between 1617 these are moms that were low.  grooming and licking low arch back nursing versus moms that were high up in the grooming and high arch back nursing so either the black bar bad mommy Daddy little white box good mommy Daddy, what do you got.  So the prime right.  Lots of methylation where you were a bad parent.  got it.  And if you were a good parent lot less methylation.  So this is going to be an individual that is producing lots of receptors for gluten cortical it who set the gym This is very few.  All right now, what do you want to do next.  let's take a look let's see let's let's first look at this interpret the data, this is famous paper, this is the one we're all side so what's this tell you this is day 20 before birth day one after birth, they six day 21 day 90, this is the five prime low versus hide parenting.  Once I telling you.

**no speaker (00:24:40.170):** say.

**Fred Wasserman (00:24:43.470):**  Right after.  Right after birth it's a remarkable difference, right after birth it's when the cells are dividing the stem cells are dividing it's very early on in development that these facts these take effect.  And that's so important because that's when you would expect cells to be dividing with this to be become a born so it's it's incredible point to try to deal with this.  Before the birth it's it's it's a remarkable it's going to be there right away it's going to start right away.  right next phase, this is the best experiment Jesse all right you've got the best one on this paper.  All right, this is where they're going to take a individual from a low parent parent parent and give it to a I Karen Karen or too low Karen Karen.  they're going to take an individual from a high Karen parents and give it to another individual, which was a hi Karen parent or low Karen Karen.  Alright, so here is the case where you have a individual which was raised by that second l by low caring parent low arch back nursing low looking at grooming and it's given to a low care parent parent parent present medicalization.  Just that one they answer.  The heck of a lot right, however, what if you took that low individual from a low caring parent and you gave it to a high caring parent to raise.  amazing.  amazing difference now if you tolerate taking it from a high Karen parent and giving it to like Karen parent.  But if you took the hi Karen the individual from a high caring parent and gave it to a low Karen parents.  So this is them saying to us that were affecting what doesn't seem like something you could affect.  By methylation presented your methylation and it alters what that individual is going to do with that individual becomes a parent on its own it's a remarkable study and it takes us into what we think of this happening today.  Okay diane you ready all right now again it's just the biology all right now last class I introduced the term of an H back emitter.  histone the satellites that's an H back so design if it's an H stack that means it's histone D a set of LACE the movie the settle groups is going to make it less effective the gene is not going to be working.  If I do an H back in emitter I reverse that effect and basically make it work again.  So in this particular study what they did, and this is a this is interesting, because this is a.  In the promoter region, this is going on here, and you really only have to focus on the first two lines, the first two bars.  The first bar is a vehicle, so this is a low grooming low arch back nursing parents, and this is a small amount of the antibody so it means it's not making the loop quarter point.  g and that's what we saw before that's what Jesse told us that, so you told us as well we don't know all you guys figure that out now what, if I were to give it an H back and editor that's what this tsa is it's an H DAC inhibitor what does that do.  turns it back on.  So it makes it actually produce the antibody suggesting that it's making the promoted the genes for the Google quote unquote receptors.  So this is what this paper did it talked about this in a way that gives you a pretty good feeling that there's something going on with methylation which turns a gene off.  I can reverse the effect by using what is called an H deck and editor and I can then get it to work appropriately.  Both of these the settled H three K nine and the N G F one a are doing that, and you guys don't have to worry about it too much, I think, what I want to drive home, and if you don't mind, and do you think this makes sense, do you think it relates to what we see in humans.  Right i'm not so sure Chelsea.  What do you think.  Oh sorry.  masks do it to me all the time okay good.  i'm just asking you do you think that this relates to anything we know about human beings.  I you know I just really Melissa oh my phone is off that's good she she sounds good alright so okay all right now so that's one, this one is looking directly at methylation.  and the results are pretty much straightforward again so here is a low caring parent lots of methylation and then here is the tsa, which is the reversing the effect.  And that's something we didn't do in previous you know the other slides before this, so this is going on there's something going on, that seems to relate to parental care here is a more recent paper from.  And it's talking about basically changing methylation rates increasing this copy of an l one retro transposition gene and effectively change the expression of the gene at all during the possibility that there is more or less methylation etc.  So it's there it's there and it works OK, now I think this is extremely important because, when we think of these effects of epigenetics.  we're thinking of them in a way that says why Why is this happening, why are we letting the body becomes so.  affected by epigenetic effects, why it's not working like that, and I want you to just want to read this very slowly and have you think of the logistic speed behind explaining why this works.  The ultimate function of an epigenetic effect may be to prepare the offspring, the the environmental conditions experienced by the mother.  That makes sense, so that epigenetics is part of the evolution of behaviors and in all animals methylation patterns are thought to be reset each generation.  But recent research suggests the possibility of transgenerational epigenetic and arrogance some cases now, though that is important and to me it's extremely important is that what, if you have a population of people who are under stress.  not able to working three jobs living in poverty.  being persecuted every time they get into are.  being looked at by the society as being different because they're black.  What if those people are leading to a difference in their genetic epigenetic the genome.  But now, what if their children and parent that and it will be persistent generation after generation after generation.  It makes this much more serious problem, because I could talk about stress and I could say well let's really remove the stress let's make sure everybody doesn't see at that and then things are going to get rosie and clean and better.  But what if this is now been perpetuated generation after generation and it's not as easy to remove now going into providing some data that show that that it may be, what is happening.  So it's not just simply changing the stress level of the generation today is actually altering this epigenetic effect over generation to generation.  let's start with this honey and i'll show you where this runs into problems, so these are suppose that epigenetic effects water fleas expose the Center of a predator have offspring with spiky armored ed's.  Now that's not so unusual, there are two kinds of effects in ecology, to avoid predators so like if you're a porcupine and you have spines that come out.  That that's one kind of a Defense and it's morphologically said but let's say you're a a muscle and you have the older of a predator.  That would have all the chain and change the actual way the Shell develops just that older that's an epigenetic effect and then what that meant is that the.  it's called an abusive this effect, so what that meant is that the animal was basically changing its development because of an external factor like an older.  It mice parents exposed to all the diets low temperatures a toxin at the census with behavioral changes and weight gain we saw that on that film last week.  This is the one that is most important to us.  After the Dutch hunger winter a famine that grip, the Netherlands in the closing months of World War Two.  The children of women, the women pregnant during the food shortages died earlier than peers one just before and at higher rates of obesity, diabetes it's a Friday, let me go to go to the next slide.  This is epigenetics this is going to be due to might be an aloe static load, which is a combination of all things that lead to stress.  And here's a picture and I want you to think about it for a second and you're ready on this one, so you have a population of this time it's finished children 50,000 finished children and it's at the end of World War Two and they were sent to temporary foster care and Sweden.  Now, what happens is that those children had higher rates of psychiatric hospitalization compared with those who stayed with the parents now.  What could be the cause of that.  Why would the children of those Why would these children actually have serious health issues, one of which, in this case is described as psychiatric hospitalization.  In, for example, children foster care and.

**no speaker (00:37:01.770):** access.

**Fred Wasserman (00:37:03.690):**  To I guess very.  Maternal early development.  There will be more likely to.  And you know you right and the question is, is it simply though that they're not simply, but is it unfortunately because the parents are there they're stressed out they're brought up in a way, when they become adults, they really going to not be a good health, environment it's a problem.  On the other hand, how do you know that it isn't due to the medicalization effect so you, in other words, see that there's a difference here.  One of which is i've been raised on the stressful environment and i'm not going to be able to handle growing up as an adult and other my children well.  But what if it's an epigenetic effect what if it is because the people who are being stress have again change the epigenetics.  And it's not simply because they were brought up in by parents that didn't care for them, but they literally had an EPI genetic mechanism and there's a difference, let me read this to you.  Is it possible that the epigenetic differences were passed on through this from the old site.  For example, previous work has found via levels of methylation on certain genes that lead to oil to cortisol production in Holocaust survivors that's the next paper that will we won't talk about that much alternatively, the children evacuees, and this is the alternative.  may have suffered as a result of higher rates of mood disorders and psychiatric hospitalization of their mothers and now and and now are affected by.  are affected by the parenting so simply they are affected because their parents were a little bit and in dire straits, instead of an epigenetic effect.  hard to separate itself so i'm going to try to show you that we can try this except it's not as simple as your thing.  Alright, so this ratio you holder children of Holocaust survivors says that we do changes at a particular site of the genome and those changes made them more susceptible stress.  The study had been criticized for small sample size time and control groups, etc, these are two very interesting papers, if you wish to read them.  All right, let's talk a little bit about the Google quote unquote receptor and I want you to think about how this plays out.  It amplifies oxytocin oxytocin.  Come on guys good actually.  it's the pedaling hormone moms that get pregnant and produce a lot of oxytocin so oxytocin promotes mother infant bonding the glucose reset their of their few of them they're not going to have as much body.  or spring with mercury mothers have normal function or spring with less nurturing mother's down regulated quarter quarter so receptive jeans methylation blocks to promote a region fewer receptive self produced.  Okay.  So what is called a soda.  Managers how your body uses carbohydrates fats and proteins keeps inflammation down regulate your blood pressure.  Controls your sleep wake cycle boots energy, so you can have the stress and so its balance afterwards.  So if we're going to not be able to have an effective number of group employed receptors all this gets messed up.  But it's actually even more so if you can't stop the effect of cortisol because then that I have problem with not regulating the quarter sell leads to anxiety and depression headaches autism these memory concentration problems problems with digestion trouble sleeping and weight gain.  After the pressure dangerous test your cortisol levels should come down your hot blood pressure of the bloody system should get back to normal if you're under constant stress it can derail your body's most important functions, it can also lead to several hope.  You do not want to mess, with the cortisol regulation in the body, and if you stressing people out on a daily basis by the way.  i'd like to measure if we could ever do it, I would love to measure your cortisol levels.  Compared to students that were seniors before the pandemic.  I think you guys are credibly stress that I have never seen anything like it does anybody want to tell me if you agree with that or not.  yeah right.  And there's so many problems that we get every day that i've never seen before, and I may have seen them but I haven't seen them in these numbers before.  it's remarkable.  Alright, so you know, this is something just on the hypothalamus on the Left activates the sympathetic nervous system.  activates the adrenal medulla release norepinephrine Aaron Aaron says epic that foreign gets into the bloodstream activates plans with muscles if you're going to be if you're going to disrupt these things.  In the right part of this and yellow activates the adrenal cortical the system releasing CN cf CRM pituitary gland AC AC Th.  you're going to create a environment of stress unheard of, and we are doing that to people who are living in poverty and people of color and we've got to alter that.  If you look at this slide, and this is a nice paper this came directly from Melissa and it's hard to to read.  In the little PowerPoint but look at what this is talking about it, and any any qualities, so the prefrontal cortex essentially for good planning and decision making.  This region is impaired by stress hormones, the hippocampus which actually learning and memory is reduce that this area is shrimps insides with stress.  The amygdala fear fear anxiety channel through this region activity is heightened stress this Olympic don't mean system don't mean of course we're looking at a the idea of.  A como is pleasure neurons signals here are critical for motivation, but they are disrupted, increasing the risk of depression and addiction.  Chronic inflammation the state brought about through stress hormones and the immune system damages molecules throughout the body, increasing the risk of heart disease and outsiders, among other elements circulatory system blood pressure, goes up, I mean arterial sclerosis and strokes.  That then fabulous sells throughout the body have reduced responses to insulin and abdominal fat increases leading to diabetes.  reproductive organs and the maladies disrupt fertility and with Gaia libido and then, finally, the chromosomes which will be the focus of the lecture next Thursday.  And the weathering and aging of the chromosomes DNA our chromosomes is kept stable by little molecular capsule the ankle to mass.  When people are stressed by social circumstances steel advanced bit shorter, they need to frayed and vulnerable from the sounds of client premature molecular aging.  stress what do you think.  Dan right.  is part of our society subject of more stress stress that other parts of the society.  gotta do something about it.  So systemic racism in this paper are looked at as the wealth gap employment differences housing discrimination.  boy you read the Boston papers about housing discrimination government surveillance.  incarceration drug arrests immigration arrest infant mortality, all of these things are.  ways in which people are treated differently and as society is a systemic racism.  Alright, so I thought this was interesting have.  More exposure to toxic chemicals if you're living in lower income neighborhoods.  Lack of green space, I saw a paper that came out only a couple weeks ago that talks about a genetic predisposition to enjoying green spaces, this is crazy.  What it says to us is that if you have these genetic markers and they use twin studies so that you can statistical analysis.  That there's some people that really need to be out in green and in the green environment, but if you live in in the middle of the city that's not going to happen.  And what this particular paper just simply says that if you take that out of our lives it's going to possibly lead to greater mental health.  let's start back over here if you don't mind, do you agree with that one just curious so like what i'm saying is is the amount of greenery you see going to affect the level of stress in your life.  usually associated with you know better public infrastructure more complex.  More money in schools and the program spending time outside at night.  and grant apart for people generally I think is good for people yeah, it is good, it is good, I just had a problem with only because you know everything is relatives in a sense, I mean anybody grew up in New York City bronx Queens brooklyn.  And you know I mean I you know, for me, going out getting fresh air was going to play basketball in school it.  Was okay.  But you know I don't know I don't know I mean I do like looking out my house and seeing green things, but you know i'm not so sure.  yeah sometimes I think we go too far with this, but obviously I don't really know how many of you think that increasing the amount of green that you see on a daily basis is really important to lower your stress levels yeah okay.  Okay, I would think so, if you were born brought up to see that, on a daily basis yeah maybe.  it's not so much like I see a tree and copy right, but like you know if you literally anything about the Boston to like.  A neighborhood like.  dorchester.  yeah yeah you don't have parks and open space yeah.  yeah side.  is more of a proxy for access, you know you don't go eat lunch in the middle of a new but.  You going lunch, maybe of the park and you know of that, but you know i've got to tell your story what the story a sad story alright, so I have two children and one of them right now my son and his family is in South Africa.  And they're in the Cape Town right now and I teach at 11 birds Oh, and I come right into here so 15 minutes before my bird so class I got a.  I got a facetime from them in South Africa.  Now let me tell you something I have never seen this in my life but they're showing me where they are, they taking an hour right outside of where they stay in Cape time and there's a colony of penguins a colony of penguins that would make me so happy, I saw that call me effect once.  The kids when they were just love it.  You guys got to do some traveling yes.  You see.  You see yeah.  I could tell if they were delhi's or chin straps but I don't know but I didn't matter, they were African penguins by sunset that's all that matters that's really cool right, and if you get an opportunity to do stuff like that.  That brightens your day.  What makes a difference for who you are, you know how you're going to feel i'm sorry.  And you know and not everybody is going to be able to do that that was great you got a chance to go there yeah that's good that's all right.  All right, let's make sure I don't go crazy with you guys today all right now.  So.  We have you know issues and there's something I want to show you that just came out, but here you have racial discrimination and mental health.  And this particular paper and the national study of the American life African Americans and Caribbean blacks and lower current and lifetime rates of major depression and whites.  So that's basically where you grow where you're growing up, and what you're able to see what your life is like, and I think that will that's important.  But in our country, unfortunately, there is a subset of the population that is not being able to experience penguins in the middle of Africa.  or penguins in my backyard.  You don't get a chance to see that.  All right.  So I want to follow this one, because this is again a paper that came out.  I think Okay, I think it's February 20th and this was from.  Melissa.  Right.  They looked at the entire genomes of Tutsi women, and this is in Rwanda and wonder face the civil war and genocide, serious problems that you know, obviously causes stress.  So they took a look at the entire genome of women.  That were pregnant and living in Rwanda, at the time of the genocide.  They looked at the DNA of their os friend.  Then they compare those results to the DNA of the Tutsi women pregnant, at the same time they're all spring but we're living in different parts of the world.  So it's a basically a decently controlled experiment in the sense that these people are from the same population of individuals.  Some of them are under the stress of the genocide in Rwanda, some of them have been able to escape that and I have to tell you what I was looking at these again this morning it broke my heart to think of what we're hearing about it's happening in the Ukraine.  So the terror of genocide was associated with chemical modifications to the DNA.  So their cell show you that this is possibly something that's happening in human beings as well.  So many of these modification part of genes previously implicated in risk for mental disorders such as post traumatic stress syndrome.  and depression.  So what we're saying is that there's skepticism.  And that skepticism is associated with the fact that i'm talking about rats in 2004 and watch back nursing and looking and grooming.  And does that relate to anything that we have to do with humans, maybe that's.  24 significant differentially methylation regions.  That has a deviation D, Mr differentiate methylation regions were identified by others and 16 and children.  Now we don't know you can't do experiments on people like you to do a rats, but you have this difference between people who are raised under enormous stress and people who have not been raised on the stress in somewhat of a controlled experiment.  conclusions in utero genocide exposure, whereas associated with again cgs in three of the 24 DM ours, and these are the three of them BC O our PD RD.  RD ma and V web with higher DNA methylation and expose versus unexposed.  You know, again I listened to.  I listened to, Melissa and Adam and you always have to be careful of drumming drumming you know saying drawing conclusions that what we see in the animals is the same as what we see here.  What do you guys think I mean, do you think this is relevant, do you think it's something that we should be pursuing.  Or is it again to off the wall crazy stuff.  You do.  Something.

**no speaker (00:56:22.950):** like this. Time.

**Fred Wasserman (00:56:27.750):**  So I think there should be research on it..  And just people..  yeah..  yeah and also the you know there's a problem, I mean, do you think is ethical to say oh let's go to the Ukraine start sampling people's the I can't imagine that would be something I would want to ever do..  I mean you've got to realize that that's you know off the wall crazy..  This is strange, I mean this is this was a strange study in a way, because yeah well you don't know you don't know how that worked out..  So all right so there's a difference there now comes I think probably the most interesting aspect of this..  study of this work..  Because you're going to hear later in the Semester about stress and what it does..  to people with low economic and poverty but i'm still really driven by this question..  Of does what happened to you..  Get passed on to your offspring, and a fashion that their genome is affected..  which I think makes the whole problem even, so much so much worse..  Now this woman and you got to follow this because it's a little bit confusing and we talked about it before and I think..  CNN or what have you guys brought up the question and I thought it was a good question because you asked the question, I believe, does affect is if something happened to the mother and her old site and that has changed, and the answer is yes..  So what happens in the old site is effective, but watch how they did this experiment..  So men sweet separates, and this is pretty recent..  Know i'd love to have you listened to this, if I could let's see if this works, this should work..  I hope this works, this is a very nice little podcast that will be jumping into what I want to show..  let's hear let's hope keeper things..  Oh, you don't need to see this okay hold on stop..  This may take a second to store hope..  network are patriotic organ donors babies and hot seat sizes for his the box ideas and or novel technologies to help you, so this is our business..  And our support site as through collaboration and I will learn more@www.adr.org slash well that's jb rf and on that org slash welcome..  Back to 2018 on therapy..  started you're listening and recurring easy to talk with me about the carotene..  Your..  Circulation it's like that only the next..  One out here..  trying to figure it out and Thomas Russell about his research into making..  These are magnetic materials, the need for the..  growth..  That we have injury she's a journalist, based in Berlin, and this week he wrote on inheritance trauma Center Okay, so this is about the genetics if it around a lot of time, but it's kind of morphing in its definition, can you give us the latest..  Things and they they talk about epigenetics but the basic concept is there are ways in which organisms inherent traits that are maybe not genetic so we have..  DNA research genetic code, but increasingly scientists are finding other ways in which traits are passed down for generations and they're trying to figure out the exact mechanism..  And then somewhere doesn't it's really easy and the more complicated the organism the trick here is to figure out how these things are passed on outside of the genetic code..  So, for example, some of the genetic mechanisms like blah blah occasions to DNA or it might be a different set of balls all together that are he..  inherited to the cells that make up the Oxford here so it's all modifications to DNA in the there are lots of different types of proteins in the cell that help when the DNA is telling us our brokers to me how to develop..  And there are different ways that these small proteins can signal themselves have three more or less block of genetics over can turn off genes so..  So that certain traits are passed on, or certain traits of epsilon and amplified ways, you know it's not something that's in..  The DNA itself it's more things that affect how the cell needs right at the very moment with the so first of all it's one of purely social divisions..  Really tiny, in fact, the bigger thing right fit and have a massive touch points down let's talk about the genetics is different from inheritance first..  What are some..  Things people started looking at how the environment change and Diana exposure extreme codes for..  A high level of chemicals could affect what was inherited and then probably about 1520 years ago some researchers started looking for noticing other effects during experiments and one researcher each other..  For I spoke with visit elements which is at the University of Zurich and he he..  created a mouse model to she wants to study borderline personality disorder so she was traumatizing the MICE by separating that from the mother..  Full intervals and then she noticed the offspring, it goes day my spot and at the same behavioral symptoms of trauma that the parents..  And sometimes those behavioral symptoms went on for several generations, the idea here is that it's not just a physical separation of food or exposure, a lot of cool is..  There something about the psychology or your emotional state of the bikes that are being passed down the reduce the stress and the stress of being separated from your parents who stress..  traumatic childhood, you could leave with your parents with a full service levels of stress because annabelle changes in your body..  That then affect how your DNA is open and then those changes can be so powerful their Apps on even to your Australia that direct experience..  Right, so this researcher that you mentioned, she has looked at this for generations and generations of Nice, she has some experiments, which is a five generations she's still sees fit and you're in the Australian of traumatized legislation, she doesn't see..  Separation like the children, our children, the children..  Separation Eric this is kind of the crux of the question is, there was a challenge for her in terms of experimental design and it's been one of the main criticisms..  When people have the humans is really hard to separate what is epigenetic tron for is sort of biologically translated..  And what is just the stress of living with a parent that has been like is your parents are that are already there..  So he is a fire now exactly so actually we should control, for that is she only studied the mail so she would traumatize male Nice and then three years so take the males out for the females, the mothers those cells effectively generations..  are so bad parents..  So this is all behavior so you can judge based on that that something is being inherited the biological that says Oh, this is still sell my car I..  Good mindset and other organism say also founds changes in sperm and blood and other tissues of things, called small ongoing are a searcher these..  Things that help them by region that this small on voting RNA in a traumatized smells or they look to traumatize people is different in specific race that in our job as well..  So there is an analyst those are passed down subsequent generations, you know these changes in our days later, as well the big question is, how does it get from, for example, the blood parent to this for the child and rather than to the brain..  But on the child style and that sort of that whole video with his wife word here let's turn to the human here for a minute, one of the first places, this was that was excellent..  So any back out what what the research shows respect our customers are a few years ago, or researcher named Rachel your brother lives there at the children of Holocaust survivors and found that they have..  higher levels of depression, but also lower those specific stress hormones and different kinds of that the genetic markers style DNA methylation then people whose parents have been born with us from similar ages forts..  and argue that this could be evidence of trauma, but that study was criticized at the time, for the reasons that I mentioned earlier, that a lot of people say well..  It made sense to either, if your parents survived all dos okay my behavior that might be stressful in a different way so that isn't solid enough evidence of this biological something that they're down..  There is an ongoing project that you talked about with children in an orphanage How are they will..  record it..  yeah..  So basically what they're doing right now is looking at humans will be traumatized to see if they have changes in his head at once, and then using those to design our settings to understand very across multiple generations and in Pakistan example, this is..  This is the orphanage in Pakistan, so a researcher who's part of his answer is law is working or visit Pakistan, whose fathers have died and..  forcibly separated from their mothers, because they have others weren't able to earn enough money to support..  And then choose which they are either is fairly close to their house..  Now they're separated from other as children and basically different levels of these RNA is just what they're using those..  kids as sort of a starting point to then design better also stats that understand automatically transmitted through different generations, but to do a human experiment, you have to look at those kids kids and follow..  For multiple generations, and so, for a whole range of reasons it's extremely difficult so controlled intervention experiments experiments right, we should point out that the sugar in an orphanage are..  There is an intention with people taking care of that nature that they're not yeah, this is the situation that already happened..  suffered..  For us, that you didn't know great care didn't go to the same schools is actually another interesting part..  To the same schools as local kids who live with it so there's also the global did so good to see a very different things and voluntary just a good care the ocean shoes there's still something about this experience that they weren't sure..  Is..  That saves our mobile Apps and what have you wouldn't need what we feel about it..  question you know it's a great question, I think one of the most hopeful things to call out of the story, for me, was again something that Steve sort of intuitive but it's been lost, so far, in the discussion about this because..  People here this idea that Oh, you know my grandparents are traumatized and therefore I have this unavoidable legacy attaining right but there's been some early experiments again and vice versa, intervening with..  Basically, for happy angel is a common interest in environments, you can reverse this..  happiness and in mice and rats and how he does things to do, and you know I we have done packs and stuff sorry about that, so I want to make sure that this work that was just described by Curry makes sense and Curry is the one who..  wrote this article that came out when is it in 2019 and it was an interesting article I found it to be fascinating and let me just show you starting at the beginning, because Matthew left you're going to be up on this right, so the woman that he spoke about first was mastery..  So, remember, we go back to the problem that we asked you before, and that is is the child or the children being affected because their mom mothers was somewhat distill it destroyed in what they experienced, or is there really an epigenetic fit..  Now I want you to follow what she is telling us, and how she thinks this works..  She took the MICE and traumatized the male mice..  She made them with females that had not been travis a test..  Then she took the mail out of the picture..  So the offspring had the sperm of the dad who had been traumatized Look how she did it..  suspended off the ground dropped to the war gave up quickly..  You know, all these things that they looked at as depressive behavior which you can question, you can say is this really depression..  Now, if you take a look at the children of the dad that had been traumatized that was raised by a good..  Normal we not traumatized female What would you expect to have..  Right now, what if I told you that those last spring, our travel..  They show dropped the water they gave up quickly they they had other indications of depressive behavior..  It came from the dad..  He had nothing to do with their upbringing it wasn't as if the offspring were raised by a mother who had been traumatized and World War Two..  So this became something that was really curious you ready..  What are you going to do that's..  going to try to figure out what is in the sperm..  And when she did that she came up with some interesting things first, you know how can trauma be passed down through generations..  How did she conduct research and it's really interesting experimental design..  What was a protocol, why did she only studied the male why because..  Why did she only study now why did you study females..  See you guys gotta get this if she studied the females, you can separate the epigenetic effect from what the female there was one was being raised by a parent that had been traumatized..  it's not just that the genetics, is not the change in the genome it's what the parent would have experienced that could have led to it, so you have to do this with the males and that's I think that's critical and understanding this experimental design..  So what did she began to look at and this was something I really never would have thought of that it's like DNA methylation but it's small non coding RNA days that are in the sperm..  that's the CNS and see small not coding our days and what she's finding here is that there is a difference in those small non-coding RNA days and the next step..  is to then take what she thinks molecular Lee is happening isolate those small movie or small not coding our days and give them to a different line of male offspring..  And that's..  Now the the article also refers to this Pakistani often orphans and the Pakistani weapons is a sad situation, but they were doing these experiments, similar to the ones that they had done in Ramallah were a lot..  Now the woman yet actually..  Did these next set of experience, similar to the ones that matt see as the doing his name Tracy bell she found evidence that the trauma affects the small non coding rnas to disarm..  She then stress nice during adolescence by barrage them for weeks and i'm predicting it doubles with things like fox odors loud noise bright light..  Then she examine the small non coding nuclear our days in this firm in Australia and here's the key she found differences in nine types of s&c not small non-coding rnas, including one that regulates s one RT a a gene that affects metabolism growth..  She then created RNA molecules with similar alterations and injected them differently stage embryos..  With those embryos, who do adults, they carry the RNA alterations like those seed and the sperm, and the second generation also have lower levels of quota cluster on corticosterone is the equivalent in mice one quarter soul is in the office..  Man sway also did this in a similar fashion..  So that's the science it's it's this particular field is in its infancy, but without a doubt it's a fascinating topic..  Now let me make sure you guys understand i'm driven by this idea of it being passed on from generation to generation to generation that's scary to me..  that's scary that's what's happening you've got to really do something to correct it..  But what you'll hear, and I think the rest of the Semester is just simply the stress levels on health of people who are of color and I think it's a little different but in terms of the biology, I think this this more that you can be thinking about here..  So you know these studies small non coding RNA is piggyback a messenger RNA is I mean it would be nice for me not to tell you how this all works and I don't understand it's like an..  interfering with their amplifying their function, I mean, I understand that, but I understand you know why is it that some of these working in a negative way others that..  Now my traumatizes POPs at higher levels of these small nuclear Non coding our days, including n one are 375 which closes plays her own stress..  So something going on here, there was something definitely going on here and there has been a nice review paper which we will not go on to today..  And I think I did it in a way that you know I made I got through what I wanted to get through and I don't want to bother you guys i'll just quickly show you the rest of this PowerPoint so you get a feeling for it, how about..  The effect of bullied on stress..  This is a nice paper that Melissa referred to, and so bullying is effective, this is an exercise and epigenetics you exercise you pass on your..  Your epigenetic effects in your awesome so that's it kids you can go home..  All right, don't get too stressed out.

