---
---

# The Gene, the Central Dogma and Mendelian Inheritence

**Date:** 2/1/2022

**Melisa Osborne (00:00:01.260):**  as well.  Okay, so it's really nice to see everybody here welcome.  So I just want to start off with like kind of like business stuff so.  office hours just a reminder so we're going to have office hours on Tuesdays after class.  And also that is in person, my offices right across the street, but also those will be available via zoom if people are not here.  Like present but want to talk and then also Wednesday morning there's office hours from 11 to noon also my office across the street and en Su.  And if those times don't work for you i'm always free to make appointments I welcome them, so please don't hesitate to ask me for ultimate meeting times a few minutes.  And so, let me see here.  Okay.  So, the reason I have a reminder in here for this podcast is because it's kind of wanted to podcasts a little unique compared to the other sources so there's a chapter assigned from the textbook superior.  But there's also This is very relevant to what we're going to talk about with sickle cell disease this week.  And so, if it's kind of like podcasts or your delivery format for information, this is really a really nice overview of the history of studying sickle cell disease in the United States.  And so, before I do the dedication does anyone have any like general questions about anything to do with like rusal or assignments or things like that.  Okay.  Okay, so today's dedication, is to Dr William one rick cardoza will talk about his work a little bit daunting today, he was.  A doctor who was he was a black doctor who studied sickle cell disease and it's mechanisms.  During I think it was the 60s or 70s, if I recall correctly, so he was kind of a pioneer in that field but we often don't really hear about him so.  I wanted to dedicate the class time today to him also I don't know if any of you are aware of this but there's actually a national sickle cell awareness month declared in the US in September.  And so, if you're interested in thinking about the link between disease and biology and sort of.  medical care, this is a really nice resource for thinking about that kind of thing.  Oh yeah and so there's sort of more information about that here.  we're going to talk about sickle cell disease today where basically one of the genes in the hemoglobin chain.  will have a mutation that leads to the sickle cell shape that gives the disease, its name and actually about one in 13 African Americans actually carry the sickle cell trait in their genes, but you may not know you have it, if you're heterozygous for this particular trait.  And so, there are many babies that are born in your lead with this disease and so that's why there's a lot of interest in.  The treatment of this.  All right, so what are we going to cover in week three so today is mainly going to be discussion type thing or not discussion lecture.  And thinking about the biology of geez inheritance and gene expression so we're going to build upon sort of the foundation for the history of science, that we talked about last week.  We talked about one as and so we're going to recap that very briefly and then we're going to get into the biology of genes and then the biology of genomic radiation.  As it will let us talk a bit about sort of the incorrect linkage of the gene and race which the textbook example is actually sickle cell illegal sickle cell disease.  And so we'll talk about how, at least in the United States, this disease is often thought of as being a black disease, but that has a lot to do with how races codified in America.  And we're going to talk about how it's a more complicated picture than just saying its associated with one group based on skin color.  Okay.  So, last week I kind of hinted at this so before people use the terminology genes and before genetics was a field right.  um traits were really what was studied in the sort of pre Darwinian era.  So the idea that you can have a specific characteristic as an individual and individual that shows up like the color of your hair or like you know the length of a tail in a monkey or you know things that are observable are often referred to as traits and in the modern era.  People often use the word phenotype interchangeably with the word traits were phenotype might prefer to an entire collection of traits.  As opposed to just one particular aspect.  And so back when linnaeus was doing his classification systems right he used these visual traits to classify plants to classify animals and.  He use skin color and so trait to classify humans, and at that time the biological mechanisms for what we call traits your phenotypes they weren't understood in any sense the work.  It was pre molecular genetics, and so the first things that got understood about traits was their inheritance so scientists did notice that traits did tend to be passed down from generation to generation, so when mark and the tall giraffes with the long necks how that God inherited.  There are other examples, and so models were proposed right for how one type of organism might have given arise to new organisms that had the same trait or.  That lost the trade so both trait gain and treat last wishes were observed, and these were sort of the original series of evolution that were developed.  And so we mentioned this, that right, you had sort of remarks theories about evolution and the idea of having long neck offspring that could.  transmit that trait to the next generation.  And then the idea that were developed when Darwin came along that that revolved around the idea of.  variation the population that occurs, naturally, and then the selection of organisms that are able to survive in a particular environment, based on the traits from natural variation giving them a quote fitness.  And so, for Darwin right and what got incorporated into the series of evolution and inheritance of traits that we still stick with today.  Is this idea that we have natural variation across all the organisms in a population.  The variation results in an organism being more or less likely to reproduce in a given environment at a given time.  And so those organisms that have a trait better adapted to whatever specific environment they are in have more offspring, which means the trait spreads to the population as a whole.  And so, this was the basics that were outlined by Darwin.  Now there are a lot of common misconceptions that came from this and actually I cleaned up this slide a bit because the wording was a bit confusing the other day.  So some of these misconceptions are one this idea of survival of the fittest which wasn't coined by Darren it was coined by Herbert Spencer so fittest in this context right.  He was talking about physical fitness or strength, but when Darwin talks about fitness that is not what he's talking about he's talking about.  an organism being best suited for a particular environment, so if you think about a population of microbes right the fittest microbes in a desert.  Are those that can adapt to dry soil they're not the fittest microbes overall that would take over the entire planet if given the chance they're just fit for the environment or in the niche.  The second misconception that really came from evolutionary theory was this idea that was very public in the night early 1900s of.  Oh, if you believe in Darwinian evolution you believe that humans evolved from chimpanzees this was made very prevalent during the scopes trial.  In the 1920s in Tennessee where people were arguing against evolution, because it would mean you know people came from chimpanzees that's not how evolution works humans would have evolved from a common ancestor with chimpanzees that was neither a chimpanzee or.  And then the last idea that often is a misconception is the idea that natural selection is a random process.  So the mutations themselves that lead to different traits are in fact random, but there is sort of gift the fitness that that these mutations give us.  an organism allows them to survive survive better in a given environment, the trait will be selected and passed down to the next generation.  Okay, so selection is directed in that if the environment, you know direct direct which mutation stay within the gene pool in the population and we're going to get into this more as we go at the molecular level as we get into talking about the genetic.  Right.  And so the thing about these common misconceptions is just like linnaeus this taxonomy scheme these misconceptions are pernicious.  There are still people that believe these things today right.  And so.  One thing that's also important to note about this is, we talked a lot about when as as a product of society and a product at this time Darwin was to and the way that he wrote about these things.  While it's true that he did not spout these misconceptions.  In some respects, some of the ways that he wrote about these things.  could lead people to buy into.  The misconceptions and to buy into the structure of race that was endorsed by biology, the illness that already existed, so one thing that I.  thought was interesting is he was committed to them monogenic.  A series of humans, so he thought all humans came from the same.  evolved from the same sort of linear okay so unlike those who thought that the limit and classifications, each one was a different actual species with a different origin.  Darwin was committed to the monogenic beliefs, however.  He still divided people into races in the way that was in the villain and scheme based on how they looked and he was convinced that.  Even though you would look at everybody as being monogenic that there were delineation in superiority and were different races were in evolutionary time Okay, so he also had some views on gender that at the time were very conventional and today we would consider to be.  You know very, very troubling and so he was a man of his time, just like anybody else.  And so it's interesting because they say this, so this is a article that was written by Adam rutherford who also wrote the book how to argue with the racist where he's talking about Darwin.  And he says here, which I find to be very useful, is he while he cast aside the idea that savage races are distinct from the civilized.  He still uses language that bears the infallible stamp of imperial dominance.  So you know it's it's he's an interesting juxtaposition of he's part of his time period, but yet he still has the prejudices, this time period.  And so it's important to think about these sorts of things when we are thinking about our historical figures and just being open about the fact that.  This will be contradictory, a lot of the time.  And something I didn't get a chance to put in here so much actually I meant to to was there's a lot of discussion right now in the evolutionary biology community about Eo Wilson right.  And sort of the theories of evolution and how he looked at things with studying answer things but also kind of like how it.  Is his viewpoints have caused damage when it comes to thinking about evolutionary theory and race and so throughout this class we're going to encounter examples of people that have these foundational ideas, but they are complex people.  And so, this is a good place to pause it and say, are there any questions.  about this first part of things when they asked to kind of like getting into Darwin.  Good.  Alright, so this is the foundation, we have for getting into really thinking about genes inheritance in gene expression so.  Darwin takes us up into the 1890s and then the history we're going to talk about now takes us into the early 1900s and sort of into the modern era of at least cataloguing jeans and thinking about the central dogma of getting coin and gene expression, this is the second part of that.  So, as we get into the 20th century, so at the beginning of the 1900s right the concept of what we call genes was established.  And so, these were some of the people that coined the terms that are often used here so there's degrees in 1900 who showed that variation can occur by mutations and so he defined mutations.  As sudden spontaneous appearances, of a new species and characteristic there was Johansen in 1909 who first use the terms jeans you know type and phenotype and then there's Thomas hunt Morgan and.  who started to locate jeans on fly chromosome, which was a big deal and actually gave us a lot of information about how genes are inherited from chromosomes like either together or or not so recombination efficiency.  And so, of course, what is the gene.  So, as I mentioned Johansen coin this word to describe them in deleon units of in here inheritance and so he made the distinction between the outward appearance of an individual, so the traits part.  and actually it's genetics so gina type, so the he was the first person to say, well, you have genetic material, but how it.  But there's a gap between the trade itself and the genetic or not like the same thing and so.  For most of all intents and purposes we're really going to think of the gene as a unit of heredity in talking about this.  And if beans occupy fixed positions in the genome on the chromosome.  And they achieve their facts by directing the synthesis of proteins and we'll get into this and i'm sure you've all seen this in some form, so this is in some ways a refresher right on the basic things we need to think about when we get into specific examples later on today.  And so.  This is the science, the version of the gene.  What is the gene and popular definition right like if people on the colloquial use the word on the street use of updates right so.  Here are some things we probably commonly say right Oh, I must not have the genes for high.  She has the gene for breast cancer could my child have the genes for X, Y or Z new idea of a gene for something is a as a big popular.  idea in some respects, it can be a huge popular pitfall misconception to.  And so, in thinking about this right.  You can define jeans is a fundamental you know unit of inheritance, which was our first definition.  You could define a gene as a specific DNA sequence.  or a molecule that's created by the transcription of an RNA product which will have a function, so you could identify a gene is the Mr name itself.  um you know it can be, or can just be an abstract concept like it isn't popular definition I gene for X, Y or Z.

**no speaker (00:19:25.110):** What.

**Melisa Osborne (00:19:28.590):**  Okay, and so i'm thinking about the term gene we.  Have the foundational work of Gregor Mendel right who studied the inheritance of traits in people, and so you know his traditional models of P plants, you had red folder smooth plants and he looked at them and.  You know, develop those kind of squares that we've all seen in in in biology class now interestingly his work first came out in 1865 and it wasn't until 35 years later.  That Johansen and the others who coined the term.  kind of discovered, though the work here and used it as.  A framework for the fundamentals of the genetics of inheritance that we all have like come to understand in high school biology and stuff.  and honestly, upon which a lot of thinking about human genetics is still okay.  And so mendel's laws of inheritance heritage of course he had did these experiments with the p plants right and so he could look at different different.  Aspects of things, so you could use in this figure and the color of the people, yes, you could look at the next generation and the generation after that to get an idea of how these sort of invisible factors that control the traits of people of color.  Are mathematically you know, broken down over time and different generations, and so, as I mentioned, it was published in the mid 1850s but not well known at the time, and it was rediscovered.  by scientists later on and us to begin to ask the fundamental questions of the genetics field that developed in the early 1900s.  And, and so these are important things that we are going to want to remember for thinking about sickle cell disease so in terms of.  The Mandela and models of inheritance there's really two models of inheritance that we often think about so there's the idea of.  A dominant trait so the dominant pattern of inheritance so, for instance here purple is the dominant trait and so whenever one copy of the gene for the dominant trait is inherited by the progeny that progeny will have that dominant trait okay.  there's also the idea of.  Oh, and so this is just kind of shown the same.  And so, then this is just another example of this shown in a different way, where you have one parent with.  A dominant copy and if the dominant copies inherited the mild without coffee is affected, so this is another example of fairness.  And the flip side of this is recessive inheritance were basically in order to have a recessive trait you have to have both copies of recessive gene.  And this is going to come up because in sickle cell anemia there was actually a lot of interest in categorizing that disease as to whether it was a recessive or dominant.  disease and the whole field flip flopped at different times because of how observations were being taken.  And sort of who was getting medical care and being listened to and in the 1930s and 40s and so it's a very interesting intersection of how what you see can be biased based on your population see.

**no speaker (00:23:34.590):** Okay.

**Melisa Osborne (00:23:35.910):**  And so, then continuing to think about so that's the foundation of like what is the gene jeans or unit of insurance okay so for the second part right.  What else is the gene well a gene can be a specific DNA sequence, and the molecule that is created by changing that DNA sequence into RNA products.  And so, if we're looking at this from a molecular perspective right we know genes are made up of the oxy ribonucleic acid vna except in some viruses, but still.  In general genes are made up of these nucleotide polymers.  And so, this is just you know so they don't kick me out of the biology department, I have to show the standard figure about how to say.  This but.  This is your your standard idea and depiction of this right, where you have hydrogen bonding between the base pairs and where you have sort of this DNA double helix ladder structure that forms, because of the shape.  Of the molecular strands of the DNA okay.  And so, this is just you know, we know that.  C and G pair and tna pair and that you know together, this makes the double helix.  And so, one thing that is really cool and so this is me walking out as being a Bible interpretation.  Is that one thing that is really cool about this structure is that it lends itself really well to DNA being actually a form of information transfer and having.  A lot of information codified in it in the same way we think of a book having information with words is the same way we think of music having information with notes or languages, having information with characters or you know all of these different ways.  If you actually think of DNA is information and fits you know so like you know digital picture or an Internet packet or some or a DVD right.  If you think about this right DNA for every site and DNA, you have four possible base pairs to choose from, and when you are making a.  strand of DNA that has millions and millions of base pairs long, the number of forms that that DNA can have the number of organizations Oregon Oregon is that organized nucleotides I can have is.  A lot of information, and so, if you think of the human genome, the amount of information and bits for the human genomes you know along along the lines of the amount of information and the DVD like there's APP if you can think of it in this really interesting.  sort of a.  way that relates to sort of everyday things okay.  And so, this particular book that's referred to here to here is being equivalent to the Eco like genome is like a 200 page book about molecular biology and so you know the equal ID known has the same amount of information as it in it that a 200 page.  So it's it's I don't know I find this to be really cool and, if you think about proteins, where you have 20 options like it's crazy.  alright.  alright.  So in thinking about DNA as sort of this molecule that's created by transcription of an RNA product, it has a function right we all learn the central dogma so here's another slide that I am obligated to show.  And so, this idea right of going from DNA to RNA protein and not in the reverse direction.  is very foundational and thinking about biology, but of course there are other aspects to this that.  You know, are added to this clinical model, you know dean's get degraded proteins get degraded DNA and RNA can both replicate themselves.  There were molecular machines that are responsible for transferring this information and doing it in an accurate way, and when they don't do it in an accurate way that supplies natural variation.  In the genes of the offspring.  And so, in thinking about this right, this is the bare bones can in canonical model where, if you think of.  A genome right, it has different sets of genes here there's just for shown that make different types of RNA that can encode proteins or not depending on things, and so this you know leads to the paradigm of I forgot about this being animated.  That leads to the paradigm of gene expression right So how do you get a gene expressed in the sort of final machine form that will carry out a function of the cell.  And so, if we think about this when we ask the question what's gene expression is it just the transcription of the active on Mr rene Is it the abundance of the RNA.  Or the translation of the RNA into a protein or the function that an m RNA can have or the abundance of the final protein product.  Or the ultimately Is it the amount of function that you have from the protein products from this entire process.  And you know the the answer to this question is it's all of these things right, and so, if you look at the full gene expression landscape now.  People don't just think of the central dogma is being gene expression they think about protein code and genes from Mr rene, but they also think about non-coding RNA like micro rnas.  Like non coding region like right so more RNA which is needed for the molecular machines of the cell like transfer RNA which is needed for protein synthesis and you know the list would go on and on.  You can also even have antisense transcripts which go in the direction opposite from what we normally associate is a gene promoter right.  And there's also pseudo D which the definition of them is yet evolving and so, if you think about all the different types of jeans you can have just a small subset of protein protein is a very small part of things.  But That being said, when we think about gene expression being all of these, and we think of the model of sickle cell disease that we're going to talk about today, we are primarily going to be.  Focusing on this canonical model where you go from a gene to an RNA to a protein and, more importantly, we're going to be thinking about this.  Other paradigm of molecular biology and biochemistry, which is that the primary sequence of the nucleotide gets translated into the primary sequence of the peptide.  which then is translated into a three dimensional structure at the protein love Okay, so this is foundational biochemistry here, and in fact I believe this example here is, in fact.  hemoglobin where you have the sequence of amino acids determined from the nucleotide sequence, you can have secondary structures, like alpha helix sees.  That create globular proteins that ultimately right bind to oxygen molecules and carry them in our blood with this very important function okay.  And so, at this point I want to point out.  A few names of scientists who might not have heard of that have studied this paradigm so Actually, I have a question if I if I tell you about an alpha helix, are there any scientists you think of that are associated with.  Determining the structure of the Alpha helix.  We.  Go ahead.  Oh that's DNA.  So so Watson and Crick DNA.  With protein does anyone have any other guesses yeah.  that's whom people normally think of calling the great appalling right, this is Herman Russell Branson he actually was on one of the first papers with calling about alpha helix structure and he is completely overlooked in the textbooks.  So he made huge contributions.  So that's that's one and then there's also Marie vader daily, who was the first black woman to earn a PhD in chemistry in the United States.  And she did a lot of stuff with protein synthesis and histones so.  that's something we'll talk about more than the epigenetics section right, but the idea that DNA structure wines itself around the proteins for the histones and that you know they get methylation and they control gene expression that way.  Something we didn't use we don't even think about in the basic central picture right so we'll talk about that later on the Semester, but these are two scientists that are largely overlooked for these really important contributions so.  I like pointing those those two out, especially.  alright.  So in conclusion thing about this what's the G alright, so a genius right this, it can be an abstract concept that has lots of definitions.  But today we're going to think about it through the lens of these two definitions one, a fundamental unit of inheritance and to the protein product of DNA that has a specific molecular structure and function and we're going to talk about hemoglobin.  So how's everyone at this point, are there any questions about this kind of.  Review ish sort of stuff.  doing good okay.  Okay, so I actually have it to have like a five minute break in here so feel free to get up stretch your legs and whatnot and we'll come back in five minutes.  that's 110 if you have a clock on you.  alright.  So get back started.  yeah and actually I just thought of something that I wanted to remind everybody up.  Real quick.  So I just wanted to remind everybody, so this is the perusal thing and I actually wanted to remind everybody if you go into the library rusal.  there's this part here that's like the information for the class and I wanted to point out that there's this Google form.  that's anonymous for providing any feedback about stuff from lecture and I want to mention that, like if you're more comfortable asking questions about content or.  posing questions about content in this form, please use this because I check it daily and.  I would be happy to sort of like expand covering certain things if they're unclear or if you hear about a person and you want to know more that kind of thing, and also, you know if I if I make.  A mistake and treat something in a way that you would like to see treated differently or, better, you know I want to hear about it yeah.  Yes.  Oh yeah so um so basically every week has a folder for readings and stuff and so as part of week three there's.  it's a small world the chapter from the textbook, this is a review on basic molecular biology of genes, if you need a refresher.  This is actually this kind of reaches back to last week and thinking about.  Sarah barn Barton and how.  People have been exploited because of linnaeus classification and then this is the podcasts that I was mentioning So if you go here and click on the link to soundcloud it's a really good background podcast for before you read about.  The articles for annotation this week so PL and power hasten began, where the to assign annotations.  And this gives you a lot of historical background for that reading so it's really good, and if you don't want to listen to the whole podcast the whole transcripts here, so you could look at it in whatever form, you want to so yeah you're welcome.

**no speaker (00:37:59.970):** Oh come on.

**Melisa Osborne (00:38:03.510):**  alright.  slideshow backup.  Not recording again okay great so the second part of thinking about the basic biology that we're going to need for this week and thinking about sickle cell disease.  involves thinking about genomic variation Okay, and so in thinking about integration What do I mean.  Okay, well, first of all, we have to define the genome right, so a genome right is the complete set of genetic information that an organism has so it has the information that are organism needs to function.  Organized into all the genes for that work, and so this is just an example of the human genome and all the chromosomes of the human genome.  And so we talked before about this idea of Dino type in phoenix, and these are terms we're going to hear a lot throughout the course of the Semester.  The genome type right is the genetic makeup of the organism, so it determines the heredity potentials and limitations of an individual from when their embryo.  To when they grew up to be an adult and so for organisms that reproduce sexually like humans and individuals genome comprises you know the entire complex of genes that are inherited from both parents, so we inherit two sets of chromosomes.  From our parents.  And likewise phenotype refers to the observable characteristics or traits the organism has that come from the interactions of the genome five right.  With the environment and that's really important and that's something we're going to talk a lot about this semester is how the environment is actually very important for changing organisms phenotype.  And so examples of things that are considered phenotypic characteristics right can be behaviors can be bio chemical properties of our enzymes.  can be color shape, size okay.  And so sort of your standard.  contracts.  Okay, and so, when we talk about something like genomic variance right all this means is that individual genomes from the same species very so not one of us sitting in this room, has the same genome, as the person next to us.  Now.  In this day and age we have whole genome or X home sequencing that are able to look at every single nucleotide.  sequence in a person, and it can be used to identify the differences between individual people, and so, in that sense.  A variance is often referred to as a gene sequence that varies within the species and there, there are many different types of areas we're going to talk about that.  But, in general terms, you can have variants that are small so less than 50 nucleotides or base pairs in length.  And so, these are single nucleotide polymorphous isms which are just one base pair of variance or insertions deletions which can be a little multiple nucleotide there, you also have larger variation so things that are bigger than 50 nucleotides so.  You can have copy number variation and certain you can have G duplications happen, those are actually very important for evolution, because the genes can be duplicated and mutated to evolve a different function.  You can have deletions of genes movement of genes so as jumping genes that are very famous from corn.  You can have inversions of jeans.  And so.  The thing that is important to note here right is that mutations, which are often thought of in terms of the suit single nucleotide level or a few nucleotides.  can result in sort of this natural variation that we talked about with Darwin where you can have mutations or recombination or gainful all results in genetic variation within organisms that are considered the same species.  And so I really like thinking about this in terms of scale.  And how you can have all these different variants go from one single base pair SNP to you know mega base pair of one.  And so, for today we're really going to talk a lot about the single protein or single point mutation type of variation we're not going to focus so much on these larger scale things, but I just want to point out that those are there okay.  And so, in thinking about this right these larger.  differences that occur genetically.  tend to be in big regions of sequence, and they can have all kinds of appearances, in terms of moving around the genome of changing the orientation of different genes in the genome.  When we think about the smaller variance though this is really the most commonly studied type of variant if you think about it from a bioinformatics perspective, so people are obsessed with snips at the moment snips and disease snips and difference.  You know it's been a huge motivator for things like the thousand genomes project in the million genomes product finding out how different people are with snips.  And so you can have single nucleotide variant which is any single mutation.  Or you can have a polymorphous some type of snip which is sort of the single nucleotide variant that occurs at appreciable frequency in a population.  So, for instance let's say we're interested in one particular gene that's in the scientist sister citric acid cycle right.  Well it's very likely that you know 99% of us have the polymorphous that gene that has a particular nucleotide sequence, and that you know, maybe there's only a difference where 1% of the population has a different you know nucleotide at position 58.  And so, in thinking about this right if they gave us about single nucleotide changes we're going to talk about the frequency of those six single nucleotide changes in terms of in the overall population.  And so, typically when there are snips that happen, you see a single base change, for instance in a becomes a seat.  snips can actually be used to indicate shared and forestry about that a little more and really relevant to thinking about sickle cell anemia discovering snips in genes that are related to a disease can perhaps suggest a mechanism for a specific disease.  And so, this is just overall, if you think about snips.  there's actually been 660 million snips annotated.  in humans.  And so you know the human genome for reference is giga base pair size.  And so out of these about a little over 100 million of those have actually been validated so that means there's been follow up studies to.  check on sort of the link between those snips and actual function and so very interesting thing every human has on average one snip every 1000 based pickers so that means in your whole genome, you have two to 3 million snips.  And so there's of course there's a repository where you can dig into this, if you are very interested in interrogating what snips have been catalogued out there for different things.  And so, in terms of us thinking about snips we're interested in thinking about point mutations because we're going to be thinking about the idea of sequence structure and function, so the sequence of the DNA to the sequence of the protein to the structure of the proteins.  And so there's different ways to think about snips you can have insertion snips which means you have added one single nucleotide you can have or sorry.  insertion snips oh my God.  scratch, that you can have insertions where one nucleotide gets inserted deletions with one nucleotide gets deleted and then you can have a snip where you're actually changing one nucleotide for another.  And so, when it comes to thinking about the substitutions and the snips themselves right.  and any of these point mutations, the question is, if you change this nucleotide sequence down the line, what happens to that protein right, and so this is where, if you think about your genome, you have one snip every 1000 base pairs or two to 3 million snips in your name.  Do all of those hit coding regions.  So a really interesting question is with all those snips how many of those snips actually hit a coating region and cause a change that affects the protein.  And so you have so in some respects, you can think about this isn't a bit of a numbers problems.  And if you're really, really interested in this type of thing there's this book called cell biology by the numbers, where they completely break this down into like probabilities and everything.  But at most basic level right, you can have these things happen, you can have the DNA change, but no change happen at the amino acid level.  um and so in in that case right it's a silent mutation So this is the original sequence there's no mutation.  You can have a change here that doesn't change the the amino acid, you can have a nonsense mutation.  Were what happens is a stock code on gets introduced, and so you have a truncated protein.  And you can also have what are called miss sense mutations where you will change, one of the the nucleotides in the code on sequence, and you, result in a different amino acid.  being incorporated right and, furthermore, when you think about all these mutations right, not necessarily all the mutations that happened cause a functional change in the protein, some of them.  Do not and that's actually a basis right or studying differences between proteins from different species organisms and looking at what.  Regions of a protein are quote highly conserved versus not highly conserved now, in the case of thinking about our 3 million snips and how many actually translate into something that affects.  Protein.  If you do all the numbers and everything each one of us has about 100 proteins that are different from the person next.  In terms of nonsense mutations having been introduced by those snips.  And granted, most of us contain two copies of proteins, so a lot of times that's not detrimental.  But it's very interesting because.  If you calculate the probability of where the nonsense mutations are you'd actually be predicted to have about 20,000 nonsense mutations, and so it kind of indicates that those get weeded out because of selection at the embryonic level and viable viable employees.  And so yeah so, so this is basically a recap of thinking about this right synonymous or sense variants don't change amino acid sequences.  Non some on it synonymous are missing variants cause a change nonsense means early termination of a protein and frame shift is only in the case of these point.  Point mutations that are insertions deletions where it changes the whole coding for it because of the nature of the DNA.  And so, basically and going forward and thinking about snips the snips relate back to thinking about like I said the genome type the variants, you have the phenotype how those present themselves.  And then in thinking about.  How we study these things we can use both de Novo variant calling, which is sort of if you're given the genomic reads for the entire DNA, you can compare it to a reference.  You can find all the known variants to the reference, but as we'll see next week, when we talk about this in depth what you pick up the reference is super important and can induce bias and what you're doing.  But also there's this idea of geno typing so you can examine individuals for a variant and unknown location Okay, and so back in the early.  Back in the early 2000s these would often be studied with micro race to look for single nucleotide variance nowadays people use whole genome sequencing more confidently because the cost has gone down and we'll touch more on the techniques and stuff for that next week.  And so the last kind of thing I want to point out, with terminology that we need when thinking about sickle cell disease.  is how variance get talked about in these different papers so some terminology will hear about when we talk about the sickle cell gene is the idea of an illegal.  So an illegal is any sequence that contains a very so contains a different step, and so you can have homozygous variants so things that both have the same illegal.  So they're either the same very interesting as the reference Okay, so if your home if you have the homozygous variant the sickle solving it means both your coffees have the same there.  You can have a heterozygous variant where you have differently so you could have one copy that's considered a variant and one that is either a different variants or would correspond to the reference team.  And then the last thing is this idea of a legal frequency, so how common a given variance is in some populations do 1% of people have that particular illegal.  Or do 30% of people have that particular Elio can vary, based on the gene that you're talking about and the illegal that you're talking.

**no speaker (00:54:43.440):** Okay.

**Melisa Osborne (00:54:44.880):**  So those are sort of like the bare bones terms for genomic variation that will get us all on the same page in thinking about the readings for Thursday and i'm thinking about.  sickle cell disease, and so the next part of things is thinking about this textbook example of linking jeans race a wheel, we have this example of sickle cell anemia and so are there any questions before I get into.  The sort of the meat of a lecture everything was built up to this right.  Okay.  Take a deep swig and then i'll begin.  Okay.  So this is a quote from this podcast that I recommend so.  Jim is.  gosh I can't remember if he's an anthropologist or doctor he's he's one of the folks on this on this podcast team.  And so, he teaches at the University of Alabama and so at the very beginning of this podcast he says, for most of the 15 years I taught the race class.  at the University of Alabama and he gives a pre test for students that come in the class and so many have had anthropology class forehead.  And so they come in and they are firmly in the camp of racist cultural not biological So what we talked about last week race is a social construct that got adopted into biology, due to its history.  But still over a third of the people in the class thought that, even though races aren't genetic categories, there are diseases specific to one race or another, and so he says here, you know and one ask what diseases guess what they said.  And so, given the topic to cover many people say so.  When you think of sort of a race based disease.  And so we're going to work on.  decoding that here so.  In terms of the mechanism of sickle cell anemia sickle cell disease it revolves around the gene that encodes the hemoglobin beta so.

**no speaker (00:57:22.170):** Okay.

**Melisa Osborne (00:57:23.640):**  And so I want to point out that sickle cell disease is one in a group of blood disorders that's caused by mutations in hemoglobin beta safina so there's another very famous examples fallacy me, which is also a disease, where there's a particular mutation in this gene that leads to.  trouble carrying oxygen and it's very common actually fallacy media tends to be endemic in regions of India, due to the same reasons why sickle cell is endemic to regions where malaria overlaps and so not to give away any spoilers where we're going right but.  So it's one of many disorders, that are caused by messing with hemoglobin so you can imagine right hemoglobin binds oxygen the transports it throughout our board so.  things that affect that binding capacity point mutations that effect that binding capacity affect the efficacy of hemoglobin and can lead to very serious.

**no speaker (00:58:34.050):** consequence.

**Melisa Osborne (00:58:36.360):**  And so, this is.  The timeline that I came up with after walking out about this podcast, and so this is the timeline of studying sickle cell anemia in the United States and so we're going to have to go through this i'm highlighting sort of the bits here that are highlighted obviously so basically.  The first there, there was an exit so there was anecdotal evidence in the 1860s or 1870s have a case where.  Someone kind of came down ill with the symptoms of sickle cell anemia, but it was not well characterized at the time, and was highly anecdotal.  So the first real depictions of thinking about sickle cell anemia happened in the 1900s in Chicago and so here, there was the first depiction of a sickle cell from a blood smear so what I mean is.  The phenotypic appearance of the blood cells of someone that was suffering from the symptoms that we now associate with sickle cell anemia, so there is a patient who was actually.  A medical student who came from southern us, who was a black man and he moved to Chicago to do his medical degree, and while he was there, he came down ill with sort of symptoms, that you would associate with sickle cell anemia different pain.  And illness, and so one of the.  Residents on staff or the sirens did this blood smear to look at how his blood work and they obviously saw the sickle cell phenotype.  Which is linked to having the sickle cell illegal and has to do with the fact that you have changed the structure of the protein and the change in the HPV protein leads to this sort of different shape in the cells okay.  And so.  The first publication of this was in around like for additional cases were reported in Virginia.  And later on in St Louis.  Regarding similar cases Okay, and actually the blood smear was taken in 1904 the publication actually first came out in 1910.  And oh surprise, it was the principal investigator or the lead doctor at the medical college they got the credit for it, not the people that actually took the blood smear.  Okay, so, then in 1917.  Ernst mo developed the blood test for sickle cell.  That is visualized with these, and so the idea is basically you take a drop of blood and you kind of feel it off, and you examine it to see how it does in low oxygen conditions and the cells, develop the simple.  And it's interesting to note that there actually are some technical challenges with that test that can lead to false results.  Those come out to be important later on.  And so it's interesting because at this time, using this technique, it was actually Dean that sickle cell anemia was a symbol mundanely dominant trait so they actually thought there was dominant inheritance for the sickle cell trait based on how they were doing the task.  And so, one thing that's really interesting about this, so in these in these initial experiments from Chicago from Virginia from St Louis the population that was being studied.  That had sickle cell anemia was people of African descent and.  That identified as black and so actually there was this very high profile work in 1930 where.  It was first stated in the scientific literature that the sickle cell phenotype observed in mo tests was peculiar to the negro race.  And the thing that is crazy about this is while this was published at that time, at the same time, there were patients in Detroit who were being studied by Thomas Cooley.  Who were European immigrants from the Mediterranean Mediterranean region, and they were also demonstrating sickle cell traits but historically.  This was the narrative that got picked up and used, and you have to consider what was the United States like in the 1930s.  Who did we read last week.  that that was the United States at that time, and so this narrative got picked up rather than this, the separate narrative of their being people from different backgrounds, yes.  yeah I mean so.  So yes, their world.  and  I feel so bad, to say that my first thought was of like the first eugenics Conference, because, like the eugenics conferences were huge at this era.  Where the big wigs from Boston New York philly DC would get together at like cold spring harbor and they would discuss the eugenics theories so like.  That was super mainstream.  I don't really i'm not too familiar with the other other scientific conferences and things at that time, I mean I know journals.  Were were like sign the precursors with science and things that we still today were founded and people read that um.  Let me look into it a little bit more and get back to you I don't I don't think the ease of access that we have now existed, but people definitely interacted and corresponded and.

**no speaker (01:05:16.830):** You know.

**Melisa Osborne (01:05:20.460):**  yeah i'd be curious to know if cooley's work got presented somewhere.  And so yeah so to get into the chronology right.  So at this time.  You have this idea of sickle cell anemia being a Min deleon dominant trait and likewise William Warwick cardoza this time did some immunological studies, where he was looking at sort of antibodies and things associated with sickle cell anemia.  And in terms of molecular biology, I find this to be an interesting footnote.  Linus Pauling who we were we talked about earlier some of the earliest work with gel electrified races I don't know how many of you familiar with using that to visualize proteins and DNA.  But some of the earliest works with Dell after freezes of proteins were to show that the proteins from a sickle cell and they normal South would electric for reads two different locations indicating a different structure of the two proteins.  And so, in thinking about this is a dominant trait.  Based on the data that have been available at the time it was thought that if you had right one parents that had.  Or if you had two parents that had sickle cell anemia it would be inherited in this dominant way where instead of this being color this big be would be the sickle cell trait.  And later on in 1949 was the first publication that said no, this is actually inherited in a recessive pattern.  And then.  The other the next really big major thing that came in this timeline of thinking about sickle cell anemia was that it was in 1954.  That allison noted that individuals who carry the sickle cell trait were resistant to malaria and that kind of back gets into what we're going to talk about this week so.  i'm thinking about the sickle cell phenotype and malaria it's known that people who carry one copy the sickle cell and Neil are more likely to survive malaria than those that do not carry the Leal so in this scheme that shown here a big a represents healthy chemo.  Whereas the fs represents the sickle version of hemoglobin and the higher fitness of heterozygous city.  In surviving malaria actually favors a balance between these two illegals in populations as a whole, and so this is an example where, in an area with malaria.  You actually have an increased fitness from having a phenotype where you have both.  A normal structures, a wheel and then a sickle cell structure Okay, whereas if you have an area that doesn't have malaria right there is no fitness benefit.  And so the contribution of a genotype phenotype to the genetic composition of subsequent generations.  relative to the contribution of other genotype phenotype is what is called this and so blah blah blah, what does that all mean that means that.  Children are particularly susceptible to malaria and so, if you have a region that has endemic malaria, having children that have both.  Both illegals improves the fitness of them being able to survive malarial infection in a very young age, and so it.  Within that particular population it gets selected for because malaria is endemic in that particular population.  And so, you know how did, how does this happen, so this is basically the general scheme for how malaria in facts.  A human being, so you have scores the lights from the malarial parasite get injected via mosquito bite right they can reproduce in the liver and enter the red blood cells.  And then develop into these different forms that get you know passed on to the next mosquito which generates you know the next cycle of infection and so, in terms of thinking about the mechanism of this.  The reason this works is because, when it comes to the red blood cells, the structure of the red blood cells influences the susceptibility of those cells to this step in the cycle, where the malaria parasites reproduce and spread throughout the org.  Okay.  And so, in terms of the actual actual mechanism if you're if you're really interested in this.  there's basically this protective effect of having the illegal that works at many places, including the ability to Chile, the heme that is important for the red blood cells to carry the oxygen but there's also other examples where.  So basically a sickle cell red blood cells releases hemoglobin that can serve as a signal to other cells and can actually stop the.  immune and cerebral responses of these different types of T cells to the malaria, so it mitigates infection, because of the release of the heat from these deformed red blood cells so it's.  it's very interesting that this is like fundamental mechanistic level this one mutation allows immune Defense against the malaria parasite.  And so I should mention right, this is this mechanistic information is very recent in terms of the chronology of understanding sickle cell anemia so.  Initially, thinking about this was just something that was observed that individuals that were heterozygous for the sickle cell trait seems to have a material resistance.  And so the how this worked in terms of protein mutations and how this results in a residue change that results in the release of the co-factor from the protein itself that's a very recent discovery.  and, additionally, something that is more recent and that we will read about this week is really testing.  This what's called the malaria hypothesis, in the age of whole genome sequencing where lots of information and lots of data is available for chronicling a Lila across populations across the world.  And so what we're going to see when we read peel at all is that they look at measurements of the wheel for the sickle cell gene across populations across the globe.  And then they looked at, where a legal frequencies they use this map that they had a measured.  Illegal to generate a map where they look at the predicted a legal frequency, so you can see, in some of these regions.  Where malaria is endemic the illegal frequency for the sickle cell team can become as high as almost 20% of the population carries a copy of the gene for sickle cell trait.  And then, historically, they also made a map that looked at where malaria curse throughout the globe and in the end, ended up.  kind of developing this textbook map right that we see in a lot of the basic biology textbooks comparing you know the frequencies of the sickle cell illegal globally with the distribution of malaria.  And so.  One thing that's really interesting about these textbook maps that tend to get developed is even though there is a global map.  Of this particular disease these textbook maps tend to focus on Africa, and this is rooted in the fact that, at least in the United States right there's this long timeline and long history of thing about this is a disease that is specific to black people.  and  A lot of this has to do with a couple of things, so one of them, one aspect is that in the history of the United States, people from a malaria endemic region were brought to the United States.  and  In in the process of slavery and so you transplanted a large population of people were sickle cell was anemic or wasn't even it was endemic into an area that doesn't have malaria in Dec.  But additionally.  there's sort of this additional aspect that.  gets overlooked that in 19 in the 1930s people tried to write about but largely got interrupted by you know the sort of eugenics and race focus narrative of science in the United States in the 1930s and 40s and so.  You know, if you look at this global map of thinking about sickle cell anemia right there are large groups from the Mediterranean area that do not identify as.  Black that.  do in fact have heterozygous city for sickle cell anemia in a legal frequencies that match.  Those that are seen in different parts of Africa, and so you know one thing that comes up in reading the powers began article is how people describe and talk about.  The spread of populations throughout the world from these different malaria endemic regions and sort of how we greet people into races.  When they are thought to come from Africa, even if, by our you know definitions of race they're not necessarily considered black.  So it's a really complex dichotomy that has led to this stereotype of this particular disease in the United States being associated with a particular racial population about population.  And so, in thinking about.  This.  It can be confusing and thinking about this because, so this is from the power hayes's began review that talks about disparities in treatment for sickle cell disease.  And so, this idea right that's the causative mutation for sickle cell disease primarily a rose on the African continent, because of the protective effect of the carrier state against malaria.  So most patients with sickle cell disease have a shared African ancestry and so globally right that doesn't necessarily mean that people are black is have that, but in the United States right.  There is still this idea that there are diseases specific to one race or another.  And if you read the text of power haze or gland even more, you know it, it can be really confusing, because in the United States as a direct result of the transatlantic slave trade.  Many patients with sickle cell disease, nearly all patients with sickle cell disease or blah, but at the same time right when you screen babies for newborn screening programs.  Right sickle cell disease is the most commonly detected condition, regardless of the ethnicity, of the baby, so there again is this idea right that it's not just black Americans that suffer from sickness.  And so you know it's a nuanced thing and how we talk about it is super important.  And so.  So we're going to read those two papers and then discuss this in a lot more detail.  on on Thursday to sort of go through.  How the language is used with our hashtags and sort of what it tells us about the state of how people think about this particular disease disease in the present day and given all sort of the history, about the discovery and the characterization.  Of this particular disease but I mean for, for my part, I can say when I learned about this in biochemistry my Professor pretty much said it was a disease that affects black people, and so I still have a lot of trouble.  coherently telling the story because there, that is, there is how I learned about.

**no speaker (01:20:34.860):** So.

**Melisa Osborne (01:20:38.460):**  Any questions I know this is this is pretty heavy yes..  So this is where we're going to leave off for today, and so, then on Thursday..  Our goals are going to be to talk about the general reading again at the beginning of class..  And so, definitely bring your computers, because we're going to do the same thing with note booking and groups..  um and since we're all here in person, I will have the poker chips to randomize us all into different groups..  for discussion and then after that we'll talk about what your hash tag pound for pound sign again and you'll go through doing the analysis in your groups and then just emailing me a copy..  You know by the next class of of the analysis that you get with the group of these two articles so yeah..  Oh, so this the synthesis thing so..  For next week, the only thing do next Thursday is reading the the case study and then the following week you submit the synthesis and so you have a week to think about it, after we have the discussions of case.

