---
---

# Discussion

**Date:** 4/5/2022

**Adam Labadorf (00:00:37.230):**  We go.  My background is quite mixed, so I was born and raised in Addis Ababa Ethiopia, where I was really interested in mathematics, so I.  That was what I was exploring and I ended up at Harvard college, where I majored in mathematics, but.  At the same time, I was also really interested in questions related to inequality and discrimination.  In the city of Cambridge where I was living and studying as a college student it's interesting to look back now but sort of the writing was on the wall, because I was thinking about how.  algorithms that are being used to assign students to public schools were creating and exasperating inequality that exists.  And how those same algorithms could actually be used to mitigate some of those inequalities.  I realized that actually I could explore both my interest in mathematics and my interest in questions around inequality and discrimination, at the same time as a computer scientist so that's how sort of I landed from my background in math so what I do now my work.

**no speaker (00:01:48.210):** is really focused on questions around inequality and discrimination, what I usually do is I you know, I have a couple of domains that i'm really interested in so economic welfare housing. Education our domains where i'm i've been pretty deeply embedded I think about ways in which discrimination plays out and these domains. ways in which we're not maybe doing a very good job measuring the inequality, or the sort of disadvantage that people are facing. And then, after doing that I also think about what can be done about this right, what can be done to measure it so One example that i'll give you is we've been thinking a lot about. Different income shocks that people experience right, so these income shocks could be something as large as let's say. You know you, you get sick and now you have this major medical expense, or it could be something small like you know your paycheck was delayed by a week or maybe you got a parking ticket right. And so, these different types of sharks have differential impact on people so some people may not necessarily even notice of their paycheck was delayed by a week right, but other people that could be the reason why they end up getting evicted. And so what we've been doing is both modeling that and thinking about how we can allocate different types of resources and subsidies and different poverty alleviation programs to address not just sort of these. Straightforward ways of measuring poverty or description or disadvantage, but also these more subtle ways that that we know to be important we've also.

**Adam Labadorf (00:03:24.180):**  Get her Ted talk is great as well and highly recommended I have it linked in the slide for today which i'll post afterwards.  And one thing that I wanted to point out that she mentioned twice is measuring.  Measuring and evolving.  And we talked about that a little bit earlier like if you can't get there was that quote from the guy who said something like if you can't measure, something you can't understand something.  and  Both last weekend this week on Thursday will be talking about using race and healthcare algorithms and healthcare.  And how using raises a variable can we talk to you that your annotation was about that, but we'll talk about more Thursday.  And how using race as a variable in these clinical algorithms can lead to significant harm.  But clearly, ignoring race is not okay either So how do we reconcile those two things.  And measurement I think is key underlying all of that, because if you're not measuring something, how do you know if you're doing better right.  into that was that's all that I have for the dedication today.  So.  The readings this week were somewhat shorter than other other weeks Jose and they were focused mostly on this campus system.  And so I came up with some questions I have two to discussion activities.  One of them is kind of straightforward so it's in the group notebook.  And the second one is going to be a little experimental but So if you guys could break into your groups and discuss these questions that we have for the first 2030 minutes.  Please do so, and then we will reconvene.  made noise.  yeah.

**no speaker (00:06:10.620):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:06:13.740):**  That wasn't.

**no speaker (00:06:17.100):** sexy.

**Adam Labadorf (00:06:39.150):**  Good morning.

**no speaker (00:06:42.210):** and Good.

**Adam Labadorf (00:06:54.960):**  one.

**no speaker (00:07:01.500):** Service thanks.

**Adam Labadorf (00:07:17.130):**  reach out to one will.  You know.  Keep.  going on.  The.  Both of the reading so nothing, so the annotation are doing separately but there's the box article and the conference or public at those two are gonna.  work.  First, it will never.  happen.  To them.  Right now.  On.  How come.

**no speaker (00:08:44.430):** Oh. she's.

**Adam Labadorf (00:08:53.250):**  raised.  Her.  funny.  First.  assignment was.  was not the result so yeah that's.  that's.  This this class, but a lot of moving parts here so many different like sites yeah yeah yeah I.  have this trailer board that has a card, and not because not throw is like a.  I have a card template that has like eight different things that I have to check off for each class and I forgot to do that for this one.  Making an assignment perusal was not one of the checkboxes later, so I got that.  forget that.  Your.  mother.  or your father done with all.  These deals being even studies are showing that it's not accurate like this.  And there wasn't an error 30% I.  retired yet.  Right.  No.  Hello.  My name is.  Nadia device capital at the London London civil war.

**no speaker (00:11:30.420):** fights if you're in.

**Adam Labadorf (00:11:38.880):**  The ice.  recently.  Based on our initial data is not that good.  People.  will get that like seen resonate for hybrid games Washington.  Like when you're older yeah the.

**no speaker (00:12:27.960):** Actual.

**Adam Labadorf (00:12:34.860):**  Software will be much better.  Some factors.  That might not.  Be.  As kind of like our talk about.  outdoor gear aria.  early morning.  Dr meyers yes.  I don't usually.  get here on the surface, for that doesn't make any.  sense coffee shop assistant social yeah.  Happy father's love.  And this is what people who do not index those for selling and judges, making the same States as an online is.  A perfect That is good, you blend.  2% better, but we have a lot worse.  than double our.  Committee on Public you don't.

**no speaker (00:14:29.820):** Have.

**Adam Labadorf (00:14:36.960):**  One on one or the.  Other.

**no speaker (00:14:44.370):** evening.

**Adam Labadorf (00:14:52.770):**  good night.  good night.

**no speaker (00:15:04.350):** That. that's.

**Adam Labadorf (00:15:11.100):**  Something that we are.  Also.  Like a.  Civil case.  invented all.  Like I really don't like.  you're just.  giving me my sign them.  up for all their.

**no speaker (00:15:37.680):** problems.

**Adam Labadorf (00:15:41.040):**  morning.  Good.  morning stressful so your new song.  writers on.  stage for the other elements in.  A.  Long efforts.

**no speaker (00:16:14.100):** that's.

**Adam Labadorf (00:16:17.790):**  Right.

**no speaker (00:16:20.820):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (00:16:25.590):**  From your.  mouth.  sure to.  Give a longer.  Yes, yeah whoa.  whoa hang on.  The bars.

**no speaker (00:17:22.860):** On.

**Adam Labadorf (00:17:25.890):**  The right on the table.  and  He shouldn't feel like this thing hey i'm not really sure.  We have so we.  made.  In.  The long run.

**no speaker (00:17:59.130):** Then.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:06.330):**  there's no.

**no speaker (00:18:09.360):** Separate.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:21.720):**  watching live on.  The farm that we've seen.  A lot.

**no speaker (00:18:33.420):** me.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:35.310):**  Seeing.  Too much.  So if.

**no speaker (00:18:47.610):** You.

**Adam Labadorf (00:18:53.100):**  Look.

**no speaker (00:18:55.770):** At our.

**Adam Labadorf (00:19:18.810):**  Because.  it's discussed.

**no speaker (00:19:29.790):** So.

**Adam Labadorf (00:19:41.250):**  Okay, who wants to volunteer for what issues questions were posed by these readings.  Our group says do some data that being Ai analysis analyze and trained on, I think, having bias, it often results in Hungary bias in.  spy salts amplified be good to do that is to really big so despite like the Ai self might not have like the highest thing like humans do because they are saying is made by humans and their vices was at a time and not have to be these two.  So so other words you saying that the algorithm itself may not be biased, but because the data is biased algorithms bias yeah.  Well there's agree with that assessment.  oppose this, I mean, I agree, of course I pilot.  But I have a question.  Do we know that that's true about the conference algorithm.  To what the Council I maybe it's the programmers who are making the I itself is bias Maybe you can add insult to.  Maybe that's one so i'll add on to the question so first off do we know if the COPs algorithm.  The algorithm itself is fair, about the data or bias.  Or do we know if the programmers to program the algorithm device.  Do we.  see people shaking their head, why not.  Imagine if you ask the programming is saying yeah yeah and they're being honest too because i'm sure they don't think they're biased right.  where's the source code for the episode room.  know we can't access it.  We don't know how it works, so that the point of my question is like yes absolutely if you have a you know quote unquote neutral algorithm with bias data, then the results are going to be biased.  But if the algorithm itself has bias that has been introduced by us, but we don't know how to assess that.  Like we don't even know do they mentioned, where the data came from that they use for their models like it's if they use data for it comes from somewhere.  But where we just we don't know um yeah I mean that's a great point that's that's the thing like these algorithms and so explain ability and transparency.  Are keys like if, especially for things like how long you guys been in prison, which might have a significant impact on your life right, you might want to know.  Why was this decision made about me why did I get the score of six for someone else fellas part three.  We just don't know so that's a so all of those things that you mentioned, could be a plane.  So here's a question its proprietary probably because the company needs to protect its IP right, this is how they make their money with their special sauce algorithm.  What if it was open source, what if anyone could go in and look at exactly how it works with that change our.  belief about the system.  And yeah anything.  fancy very good listening or that like we don't know you can say like Oh, we explicitly burn rate, or whatever you know, like at least, then you make informed decisions about what's.  In my elbow eventually department of corrections rightly I want your events on a more than than what we would gather what gets yeah right well that's a good point.  I wonder if correctional institutions wants to know, I wonder if they want to know how this how the algorithm works, they might not right they'll just be like just tell us the answer and then will trust you.  And there's a level of accountability that then would be passed on to the correctional institutions if they didn't know exactly how this is.  There anything here surprise you.  Nice.  range Jewish people felt the people who used it so.  This is a doctor or like hunger for it and saying I don't use anymore like it like it seemed like all their job is like rely on it without the game, you know so it's nice to see that getting willful ignorance or Laughter  yeah I like that the I agree with you, I hadn't thought about it but.  There are the you know, in the judges out there who, like you, this system skeptically right.  And I wonder why they came to that conclusion.  I genuinely wonder out at all i'm not a judge has anyone here a judge.  But if you were a judge and a circumstance led you to just trust a number that the system was given to you what would that situation look like you can imagine, now I.  guess it would have to be it goes against your intuition.  Right, you have a situation where the system is telling you one thing, but your intuition your experience to tell him something else.  And with that and maybe that judge who mentioned that is concerned enough about false positives.  But.  It sounds like you.  know not being judgmental know people really follow a bonded on how people are doing with later, but I know the response rate was a lot lower than.  You know if Congress predicted that as high risk like it was quite inaccurate I think granted there aren't a ton of studies about it, but the public article cited a few different statistics on the inaccuracy so i'm hopefully a john seeing some of these numbers and said.  yeah.  I don't maybe I was very surprised that.  there's our news, but during that during my.  During my sentencing, is it really just seems like a very like due process yeah like this bias algorithm just influencing.  People live events when it's in vibration that has an accuracy session right.  yeah.  A violation of due process.  that's really interesting.  Because the i'm sure they the north point the company that makes pompous would argue that this is actually supports due process, because everyone is subjected to the same process you in.  Principle there, they would argue that they're removing subjectivity from any of the sentencing that the judge does.  So you could actually they would make the opposite argument right, but clearly interesting be widespread or making a systematic and within like an earlier comment, removing possible accountability personal accountability.  um.  yeah an honor you had a point I was gonna.  follow up on to.  My last it.  said earlier, what did you say earlier, I had a thought when you said something and then i'm.  not playing that right.  that's right yeah.  just trying to remember names i'm sorry What was your comment on.  That you remember, as you fall on the promise.  we're just talking about accuracies ah that's what it was great well last time we talked about accuracy right that there's not just one kind of accuracy there's will tell you what Let me pick it up.  Another thing that I didn't.  Do is I try posted the lecture.  So, like What do you mean by accuracy, when you said accuracy, what do you mean.  Like all of that, like minimizing both false positives and false negatives, no one's.  So.  This.  So if you weren't here for lecture last time.  On the right here, this is what's called confusion matrix if you have an algorithm that's predicting a binary outcome, yes or no true or false.  there's a set of you know, certain people were predicted to have the high risk of refunding and then some of them went on to actually reoffend and some didn't go on to read that.  And so true negatives are people who were labeled as low score low risk and did not reinvent the algorithm got that right.  True positives are people who were assigned a high score and did go on to reoffend and those are two positives so that's the other than got it right these ones they got it wrong.  So a false positive, is there a specific person was assigned a high risk score but did not reinvent they had a longer sentence than they needed needed.  and low risk score false negatives would be someone who's given a lower score but did go on to your friends list should have been.  Of judge.  Like would have wanted to give them a longer sentence.  but really it depends like there's a there's 20 different kinds of accuracy in this case, but i've just highlighted break.  So I think it's all of them and there's this what i'm possibility this.  group fairness and possibility theorem so like you can't actually balance you can't have equal false positives and false negative rates.  if certain conditions are true it's like a mathematical impossibility until you always have to have a balance between the different types of accuracy that you have, and that is fundamentally the argument that that northpoint we met we didn't make.  That in some sense but is that.  Right so let's let's talk about this one.  Imagine the complex algorithm.  Was adjusted so it did not demonstrate biases based on race or anything else let's just say got it right or this there's no there's no group differences.  But as we just mentioned there's always going to be false positives and false negatives.  Is now the algorithm just.  So are people talking about on we also wanted to share that even home service level doesn't seem like it's demonstrating the bias if it's looking at Dr.  From house uses policies for race or other kinds of bias and even if not in the false positives and false negatives, are completely random question we ask.  Is the rate of them higher or lower than it is better human gender relations decisions, because if the rate of these false positives and negatives fire, that is.  The person making these judgments, then it still doesn't seem just because no matter how much money you are manpower it's saving it doesn't seem like the justice system is somewhere where we can be cutting corners.  So if the error rate was higher the algorithm than human judgment.  Then they would not be just yeah.  And if it's lower than the discussion has to be had about like how much lower.  But if it's lower than even just by a little bit that it is just know I guess i'm saying it has a good discussion about like if it's lower, and then it opens it up for discussion, I feel like if we should be.  Oh, I see so if it does worse than a human, then we can just dismiss it out of hand and you say well there's agree with that.  What would a job, say, the thing.  I imagine there's no equal shot up like being home longer than they're supposed to be well you know you're treated as somebody who is going to be, you know rebounding you aren't.  You know that error, thank you for that, like you have any people shop, regardless of your reason they would probably say it's faster than a question of.  You know, like are either already thought john inherently by this right and if somebody makes a mistake right like.  And you're being held longer than you're supposed to be like that's probably I wouldn't say it's just by that and then again in Chinese automakers are conditions where we all know.  Neither.  Does not quite the right class and i'm definitely not the right instructor to ask this question but i'm doing it anyway.  yeah so Brian you had a comment to.  say.  That basically it's just if.  it's true balanced accuracy is better than human like accuracy, on average, woefully out now, given that you're seeing the criminal justice system is also pretty awful I would say, someone with accuracy in general, so humble really low bar really what what justice is I really.  don't know.  Any more comments on that, on the Jeff how just an algorithm is before we want this last related question.  For example, depending depending on was based on the fact that it's amazing to me.  But I think it's important to point out the fact that we are not rejected.  And movie.  Like obviously.  You know catch them on a farm, so the Bible translation sentencing, they will not, for example, but that doesn't necessarily mean that they're getting the correct.  Answer like or get them technically incorrect.  So, again we're not that God might have their own set of appliances.  Huge dinner tonight, what a human would be able to be able losses.  Prepare.  Because, so another Another question is the information that a judge uses the same as the information that the Elder the business.

**no speaker (00:36:25.380):** and

**Adam Labadorf (00:36:27.840):**  play.  Any ideas here on this one person they're also looking at their experience right competence, I was in a bunch of magic when we talked about right like if the data is already.  showing us disparity is dismissed it out disparity so like I feel like he definitely think competitions like using finds data.  Because the data is being that more objective.  that's The other point is that, although most of us are still happening on third each their own there's nothing full so depending on who they are, as a person, whether or not they have their license and then walk them through just as complex as often.  So, in other words, every judge every one of us has our own algorithm right there's Queen.  mean if you think of an Ai algorithm as being trained on specific data set like that's us right like we have a specific data set, which is the collective set of our experiences.  And once again tell me that again i'll say I love these discussions, because I learned way more from you probably, then you learn for me, so thank you for all that I hadn't thought about this, but.  What pompous is doing is it's like so here's this person here's some information about this person well it spits out to score by saying other people like this person went on to do this.  So the sentence suggestion, the score for an individual is based upon an allegation an average of lots of other people.  Is that what judges do I don't know what you think is that what they're doing implicitly are they saying well this person is like all these other people that are judged and so, therefore, this is an appropriate sentence.  And you know what I guess early is and how that can be part of their tenure as a judge, because you see right if they're that they've been judging people over five years in seeing more people they have more experience.  Like maybe they hone in on that sort of like whatever they do you know um.  But yeah I mean because, as they are any.  Other imagine they see a bit more subjective data right that they see a person and forth they like, maybe talk to the person and seeing what they.  Are remorseful right they seem to Helen genuinely excited they're acting or comments it's just like you live at home, your job to you, you know so.  So yeah or maybe the dawn is implicit bias, like our implicit biases and it just exactly the same thing accomplices doing.  So it's both probably it depends on the judge for sure and that's, of course, always the answer there but.  yeah I think this the discussion underscores that you know accomplices doing is not you know radically different than what humans do.  it's just kind of like shifts it to a different system.  Right so let's talk about this last one you shouldn't technology and data be used to tell them something.  Right oh yeah sure.  If they thought we don't come from does it take into account the pricing details of the case like we haven't used to I guess good morning.  For me.  Oh.  Maybe a little bit that's actually what my experiments, going to be it's going to be related to that, from what I understand from the article.  The.  there's like 137 question form and some of these things are related to the actual crime, the charges.  And there were some that's like exclude the current case for these questions, but there are other ones that were like.  include the current case for the following questions.  So there's a little bit of both Okay, but but, in general, no I don't think, so I think pompous is more like.  Is the average of what are all these other people did who are you know similar to this person.  there's what the algorithm is how they how they did, and so here's how we think you should do.  or this person will.  yeah great question.  And all this stuff is so subjective it's just it's impossible I, we had to take a.  law and ethics course as part of our PhD training here and the.  instructor was like please scientists come to La we need you and I, that I left that course knowing absolutely 100% I have no interest in law whatsoever, because of all the subjectivity involved.  But that was a long time ago, so maybe my.  Note hasn't I don't want to go on too long time.  Alright let's do this last one any any other other comments about the discussion so far.  For.  For technology and data to be used to determine sentencing, if you think absolutely yes your hand.  i'm not saying yes i'm just demonstrating if everyone says absolutely no.  One yeah they're thinking right now with devices it shouldn't be just corrected assumption, and if that's not possible right now also just be more transparent.  To everybody that's a nice enough that there are allegiances glossy the lies is paid by them.  Well, it goes back to Jesse.  Your point about how you should only use it if it's better than what's already there.  But how would you assess that if you're not using it.  That wasn't a rhetorical question.  Like you could put do that right, the point system like make predictions, but don't actually act on those which I suppose.  In.  Training and we do do it several phases TV and like they are you know, on their field tested it right like there's information what is compensated what actually happens, is it not really getting her happy with yourself all right.  Without every deployment I female people.  line so if Congress had done that I actually I assume they did right, the problem with it, is that they're trying to sell their products to you know.  A jurisdiction, they want to show that it works.  So then, one of the training on.  What data.  that's available right which is.  Is.  And we've already seen that if you try to unbiased data there's this fundamental trade off between fairness and accuracy.  So if they tried to unbiased the data would make their other than less accurate.  Is that a good business case.  It makes the product worse.  From that perspective.  I mean, these are great questions yeah like, how do we, how do we approach this and.  Like Athena right, so your to your point like yeah you should test it, you should figure out a way to figure out what the accuracy is.  But also, more to the point, like, I think there was impact right so three one thing I mentioned in the lecture on Tuesday and Thursday was companies are being asked to put out an impact algorithmic impact statement.  What is the impact, but do they have knowledge as the impact of the algorithms that they have.  And I think this is why the pompous system is so like to devices contentious controversial because depending on who you are the impact is really severe.  And the impact for some stakeholders is exactly the opposite of the impact for others right there there's a tension there.  So there has to be some sort of a value judgment placed on what is the effect of false positives and false negatives and.  I have one more thought about this, which is morbid but I remember hearing something about robotics Ai and robotics.  and using a military context I can't remember I can't remember where this came from, but there's some.  Ethical guidance that's like a an algorithm should never decide to take a human life.  Only a human should ever decide to take your life doesn't make you right.  But algorithm should.  Just kind of related.  Right, so I don't have a solid opinion on this last question.  But along prison sentence can have a totally disrupting effect on someone's life, which is you know not being taken exactly but it sort of as.  well.  that's fine otherwise, why are you why should.  All right, let's take a break there's any other any other comments about this.  let's take a five minute break.  Not experiments Tom.  know.

**no speaker (00:47:28.830):** well.

**Adam Labadorf (00:47:38.430):**  You know.

**no speaker (00:47:41.550):** it's.

**Adam Labadorf (00:47:47.460):**  Healthy because it makes.  us more.  Hello.  Some.

**no speaker (00:48:15.840):** person. Eric.

**Adam Labadorf (00:48:28.560):**  Look.  Like.  That right.  off the BAT.  and  Neither not.  sure.  And then i'm like you know I live on the moon, yes, no.  So.

**no speaker (00:49:21.690):** Bad.

**Adam Labadorf (00:49:23.040):**  At all yeah well yeah.  Nothing in a place yeah.  yeah over.  and  Over.  again next week.  Shall.  We.  one.  song yes.  Very now.  yeah.  it's you know just.  Fine.  Right.  Right.  So.  Good evening morning.  is not a long term.  yeah.  But.  yeah.  yeah.  yeah.  Thank.  You.  yeah.  Okay, so bear with me yeah quick comment of the article for today, like was under like I think you just decided it was under people love it, so I was just use one, there are many techniques yeah so it was like underneath a lot of them.  Like, for example, I I did not know that I should read that article yeah right now yeah no it's Okay, no one's gonna get in trouble for.  For not following directions that weren't specified we'll we'll deal with it, so that the actual annotation for this week was kind of like a bridge lecture or a bridge reading because it is more relevant for what we're going to talk about on Thursday.  So how about.  yeah also communicate enough class about it it's relevant for Thursday we'll be right.  Okay.  So this paragraph stuck out to me, as I was reading.  And then, if you go look at the various other questions.  Because these questions, I mean they cherry pick these right but.  They can cause pause they caused me pause and I read these questions, and so I looked I looked into it.  And this is, this is the document they had some annotations, and so this is the raw document.  This is the list of 137 questions that this company deploys in Wisconsin I assume the questions may vary a little bit from state to state based on laws and corks, but this is the Wisconsin one, so we can assume that this is similar to most of them.  And I was reading down in like a first they start at the top feel like Okay, this seems pretty relevant to potential.  Re offense but, as you go down the question is getting more and more like sociological.  And so what I like to have some like ideas for activities about this like randomly assigning some of these questions to each of your groups to be like over these questions and then just talk about whether or not you think they're relevant and.  From a judges perspective.  or from a social workers perspective.  or from the public's perspective.  And I didn't do that I didn't actually I randomly assign them but I don't know what do you guys think does that sound interesting.  there's a lot of the word broke down is like there's a lot of questions, and so I didn't know how to like regulate the number of questions asked each group to talk about but.  and  New 10 per group.  Right there's like I was going to say, starting with family criminality this this 14 sections of thing.  But there's one two.  Well 13 1415 so the 13th all sections that I couldn't figure out how to make this task, not tedious by assigning here's do 30 questions each no problem right.  anomaly divided subdivisions your groups pick two questions per section.  And just.  So here's what I was thinking I don't know let's do this interactively.  I was trying to come up to the table, maybe we can talk about this and it's like.  perspective.  judge.  dependent.  social worker.  Is the question relatives that make very relevant relevant.  Material Israel.  This is what I was playing, so I think we can do like a tally like pick two from each section for each perspective we're gonna tally whether you think the question is relevant neutral or irrelevant.  So sorry to sound like a total train wreck might be right let's do it, so please define your groups pick two questions from each section.  And then we'll get back together and see how this works for scientists right okay with expense.

**no speaker (00:58:38.250):** For.

**Adam Labadorf (00:58:45.870):**  Our.  spirit.  Rising five or more.  follow.  me.  On.  airfare and figure out.  what's up.  What is.  It is a.  lot of us, so I want to be a.  lot.  easier, yes, yes.  Very.  unstable.  off.  Again, thank.

**no speaker (01:00:08.940):** You.

**Adam Labadorf (01:00:18.810):**  Very.  locked in.

**no speaker (01:00:51.720):** Right.

**Adam Labadorf (01:01:05.010):**  As.  Integrating a lot of.  Patients.  of you.  Yes.  We can.

**no speaker (01:01:36.180):** Have a.

**Adam Labadorf (01:01:41.250):**  lot of.  value.  me.  and  Some.  Other.  fearing.  three.  to nothing.  But people.  Good.  evening.  yeah.  i'm on the Horn.  You.  will be.  Living.  nine.  or so on.  Right.  Explaining in terms of life right.  Now.  alkaline anyway so yeah we.  Have you ever read the purple one yeah.  This is Dr.

**no speaker (01:03:49.200):** fishnet for. me.

**Adam Labadorf (01:03:59.310):**  sections.  Number dash.

**no speaker (01:04:19.020):** It.

**Adam Labadorf (01:04:24.780):**  On yeah man let's walk right.  When you.  Mention like those stories and guess what.  there's not an opportunity for now.  likely, probably for over and.  There are many.  People who.  are not ready to support or even 30 years ago it all tomorrow.  Show.  Before.  People benefit.  Right like anything that's.  Not certainly.  figures.  josh.  is right here.  yeah.  yeah.  Thanks so.  Much yeah I.  mean Sorry, I just want them to hear.  Ladies and.  Gentlemen.  person.  Actually it's more.

**no speaker (01:07:43.470):** Yes, it's.

**Adam Labadorf (01:07:45.240):**  Their last Intel and yeah.  That was my personal lives.  Please do you want some from.  Our nation, yes, all.  Right yeah no.  problem.  No.  water.  Okay, I want to rally in 10 minutes, so I want to be five years.  yeah.  yeah.  yeah.  More time.  People.  In their space.  boy.  bill.  I think we're.  Probably rolling.  Your.  eyes.  yeah.  I will.  Also.  strong leader.  yeah.  You know.  What your reaction.  to it, you might feel.  Like you forgot your arm.  Right.  yeah.  For.  Many.  I didn't grow up.  here.  Getting.  backstage.  yeah.  running out of.  Time.  yeah.  Someone.  arm.  But.  We won't wait.  Wait.  seven.  Very.  cool.  That defensive.  posture yeah.  That.  one.  And then.  All.  Sudden.  or less yeah.  yeah.  yeah.  Johnny.  Johnny yes.  Then.  Evil there he.  told me know.  Resources data.  watching.  For.

**no speaker (01:16:45.480):** Free.

**Adam Labadorf (01:17:11.970):**  have to get it, or it should be.  fun.  accepted Islam.  Islam.  Right one minute warning.  So.  People are.  All right.  Here, look at.  Next.  up like.  All right behind.  me here.  God.  knows a lot.  about the.  rock.  what's.

**no speaker (01:19:24.870):** up.

**Adam Labadorf (01:19:35.340):**  You.  Love me.  let's let's gather gather and see how this is gonna work.  Alright i'm gonna see if we can get through all of this we're not going to be able to talk about the individual questions but.  i'm really curious to tabulate this whole thing, based on the questions you asked about okay so um group number one print charges can someone read the two questions you PICs and then we'll fatalities and.  So originally we were going through this we had read your questions and then talk about what he called it, which is a great plan today.  But.  If they get all of them and it's not a question or good way to day, you know if you're talking about like the pain of charge, and this person will dissolve like that's pretty relevant to everybody involved.  And says, like you know what we talked about game numbers and how that was saying questionable more so because it's subjective so it's either based on the suspected, you know status, like interviewing well we think they're getting number.  Or the person like admits to being again in her belly also why so that means right less relevant suspect at least the the information the truth information might be relevant, but whether you get truthful information now.  But I mean I kind of agree that on, and let me ask you other groups, the Group to do, did you find that generally the current charges were relevant questions to everyone listed.  There, the one thing that any of them except the like the prime suspect gangly once.  said, one thing they weren't relevant.  So, probably.  Criminal history, are there any that you encountered in criminal history that seemed either neutral or irrelevant to for the purposes of sentencing.  that's how we should do it.  So everyone thought those questions and relevant.  Non compliance.  Did either of the two questions you can sit around the questions you can say i've seen neutral or irrelevant.  So everyone thought.  All the questions in the non compliance section, where relevant, plus.  Family criminality.  Some of them like what if you're like a strange a little bit from my brothers and sisters like if you didn't really grow up together like I know you're not them or something I don't think that really.  From whose perspective.  From a committed.  So we'd have at least one like polo shirt really you know, a jogger citizens citizens, like others, you know but violence department of down so when do.  I wasn't sure about that perspective, either, but anyway.  Right, so this first one, I mean yeah family criminality to from a Defense perspective, like they can be like my my father was never in my life, but for them, maybe that.  That is irrelevant, but for judges perspective, it might be.  appears that anyone have any questions and prepares that seems to be either neutral or irrelevant.

**no speaker (01:23:57.270):** well.

**Adam Labadorf (01:23:58.680):**  again.  We are, we are not so interesting that they almost twice as an interviewer number and you say your.  Name so sneaky you ask the same question twice in two different parts of the survey to get different answers sneaky.  yeah.  I.  mean that's a really good point it's a really good point, in fact, because.  Apparently pop is all products centered around this list of questions and so, if you have duplicate questions.  That might over emphasize the importance of that question right we don't know.  But like is I imagined that would be relevant to the judge right.

**no speaker (01:24:54.690):** yeah.

**Adam Labadorf (01:24:56.190):**  I imagine it would be relevant to the citizen in general.  yeah other than that social worker, this is a.  This is a hail Mary.  Anyone taking any social work of course courses ever.  I haven't.  From the defendants, do you think from the defendants perspectives if they're part of a gang do you think is relevant for this i'm saying you think they might think it's Roman.  i'm going to do.  Like.  Hopefully it's clear the point, the reason why we're going through this is that these questions, presumably are the data.  That they use.  And so the question of whether these data points are relevant to sentencing is very much central and so.  that's what struck me like, why are they asking these things like.  substance abuse.  Anyone find me the questions from substance abuse neutral or irrelevant for sentencing.  I guess there's maybe this is the problem social worker has nothing to do with that so that's probably the problem i'll skip them to read this one.  know, would you think.  it's tougher unrelated that should act about you know general actually not sure.  Like your own.  Personal price and such as i've been here from analogy okay with like a dui I can see you being an alcoholic being able to select your finances, but like.  generally.  But even even in the article there's one of the silly in the article you like stole some stuff because.  At the same time that he was struggling with a meth addiction, so there is a higher incidence of crime associated with substance abuse.  Like helping you know, putting people in prison or long very doesn't help them substance abuse, because they're struggling with the probably.  sensing.  But from a judges perspective from be relevant.  For citizens perspective.  Maybe just, if you will, if you fear crime and, as it would be.  No.

**no speaker (01:27:52.140):** it's.

**Adam Labadorf (01:27:53.370):**  Only a risk score before they even talk about like..  You know, asking this question and started like what a person be better off treatment relative to whoever you know stealing stuff on meth addiction was coming to treatment, instead of our next is i'm going to send that out, and so on, but yeah this is companies actually do not..  Trying..  yeah well..  Well, the the whole reason why are so the tabulation experiment is failing, but the discussion is great so..  Will will happen, and the reason that I was inspired this and I was inspired to do this because later in the in the article, but the person who invented the complex algorithm was like i've never intended for this to use percent the same it was intended for alternative resources..  And when you read, and so the thing that I was trying to get out with the social work thing was like, if you read that, from the perspective of a social worker like it's all totally relevant and you would like..  indicate all sorts of different support services and strategies and networks, but if you read it from a sentencing perspective it's completely different..  Right and we're talking about a lot, especially the last giveaway visible bit more personality questions like this could just be like a mental health screening thing..  Obviously, yes to some extent mental health is really different prime they may be in in the perspective of a social worker like what resources do I need to be providing this person on and it's not really like..  We do you ever feel boring like How does that have anything to do..  You know what sentence see I relevant for..  me I love is a lot more personality leisure..  Now these ones down here yeah so let's just keep marching along resilience stability any of those relevant URBAN..  Anyone has been particularly relevant or irrelevant..  person, remember that one what was the question is there a telephone at this resonance or..  well..  I kind of want to put social worker back on their..  own..  So maybe the purposes..  yeah..  Sure, it makes it..  looks just..  like this it's really important if you can't get in touch with someone that's true for medicine as well right like if you can't get in get in touch with someone a patient on how you're supposed to communicate that they have appointments..  were the ones in residence stability that seemed very relevant from like a judge's perspectives..  And he had an alien..  I think beyond that, like..  You need anything for being in section..  There is..  yeah..  You nailed..  It I mean I don't know if that's a..  Really presentable experience yeah..  We find more..  So..  What about social environment..  I don't kind of done one is it easy to get drugs in your neighborhood I got a question at all..  yeah what's also good fighter the subjective and based on like what you know..  What kind of drugs are they asking yourself the question to play..  You get certain drugs like embezzling is fairly easily but I don't i'm just saying that there aren't about for like you know some humans grammar spelling it's all relative already seen them dramatically..  And you know what some and social environments where it's really easy to get drugs really affluent Community so..  that's probably not what they were thinking when they wrote the question right..  Education..  Any that were particularly egregious and being relevant or irrelevant..  I agree, just just relevant to her home..  We said a lot of them aren't are not relevant, I mean it should be asking more about like the resources of schools if they're trying to probe..  la..  lower income communities or something like skipping classes and we all practice your classes and do fine or vice versa yeah I don't think it really have anything to do with..  yeah it really makes me wonder how, how do they use that information to Morocco like where's that incorporated..  I imagine it's predictive of recidivism..  But no, but why, why is it predictive..  And it's going to be correlated with all sorts of other things right..  location..  location relevance..  Well there's a question that I asked for me as complex as like friends and family over money which..  Depending on the the prime in question right if you're convicted of robbing people and and then you say I will..  Try to remember bills like or i'm hobbies like complex like I can see why john who can say but..  I don't have that relevant because they're thinking we're going to send something back out who still is living in poverty, they are going to do the same thing, but he's off as a social worker by the report he has a person is resorting to find like a mouse..  To do..  It right very, very easily see that happening..  only get through these because the last three years there's..  social isolation..  So relevant..  For touches..  shouldn't be..  any particular like ridiculous questions in that section that people want to point out..  and never felt sad..  it's branching more into personal psychology..  Sentencing yeah it's like one of those things where it starts off it's like this totally makes sense and then the questions to start going off the rails right with respect to this..  Alright, so let's put ourselves in the in the shoes of someone who has been has been charged with a crime they're being asked by a screener to answer some questions and the section..  Criminal personality comes up and ask you questions about your criminal personality..  But there are no right or wrong answers just indicate how much you agree or disagree with each statement..  of any of you use the harsh hogwash hashtag in any of the annotations..  I put it in there just because reading..  davenport I just needed to feel better..  This needs to have some sort of subjective like a little bit of early because it's so early ridiculous..  let's take the one time I take off my dispassionate scientist happened just like say this is absolutely absurd so now, but let's talk about that one..  terminal personality..  Who would say strongly agree to want to team..  People who don't sweet talk people would say, I strongly disagree and people whose We talked people would probably also say they strongly disagree right but..  I would be so interested to see the data underlying these and part of the system, to see how many people actually track the different ones there, because who the heck would say yes..  And i'm really good at talking my way out of problems..  There are no right or wrong answers, this is just going to be, you know used for the judge to see and actually give you a sentence..  Maybe the judge, I think the judge actions these other responses, or maybe just I don't know..  I guess, I imagine, the fact that you're there..  means that you're not really good at talking to your way out of problems, because if you were you might not be in that situation..  folder that goes..  There was one complaint about some of these they're absurd, I mean there are certain for the for the purposes of sentencing again right like, as the person presumably knows that they're being scrutinized or something..  anger..  And goes irrelevant to a judge..  Assuming even trust two fighters..  That any of their responses in here..  trends towards like agreeing with the the wrong answer..  I don't think so for all like not sure..  agree or disagree..  well..  I mean, I guess you can imagine why a judge might find that useful..  Last one terminal attitudes and then we're done we're done..  Again, there are no right or wrong answers..  Who would trust that that's true..  But there are no right or wrong answers to these questions..  While we're over by a minute any last thoughts about this..  And it seems like asking all these questions answering all these questions, while they're not eating good quality relevant like my first like a prison like are you violent when you're angry or..  they're not going to be authentic and..  True inner triple um yeah but like..  If it's just videos for and they're not considering all of these things and it's useless, you know, like..  That are you there..  yeah I mean if if I if I try really hard, I can sort of see why judge Mike same some of these things are relevant right if assuming the answers are truthful like..  You could see a reason like there's probably like intuitively trying to ask these questions of someone when they're..  When they're judging them, so if a judge were to read on these questions are like yeah Those are the things that I try to assess as well, but this is self report and it's data, which is a totally different story..  Okay we're done thanks again for great discussion also the communication about the audition sorry I messed it up oh pushing off..  See you on Thursday..  yeah.

